# 1. The Unity of Normativity

*Ralph Wedgwood*

### **Abstract and Keywords**

What is normativity? It is argued here that normativity is best understood as a property of certain concepts: normative thoughts are those involving these normative concepts; normative statements are statements that express normative thoughts; and normative facts are the facts (if such there be) that make such normative thoughts true. Many philosophers propose that there is a single basic normative concept—perhaps the concept of a reason for an action or attitude—in terms of which all other normative concepts can be defined. It is argued here that this proposal faces grave difficulties. According to a better proposal, what these normative concepts have in common is that they have a distinctive sort of conceptual role—a reasoning-guiding conceptual role. This proposal is illustrated by a number of examples: different normative concepts differ from each other in virtue of their having different conceptual roles of this reasoning-guiding kind.

Keywords: normativity, concepts, reasoning, conceptual roles, reasons

## **1.1 Senses of "Normative"**

What is normativity? How should we demarcate the domain of normative phenomena, and distinguish it from other non-normative domains? Of course, the term "normative" is a technical term; it is not in regular use by ordinary citizens on the street. So, philosophers who use the term need to make it clear in what sense they are using it. In fact, as I shall explain, not all philosophers use the term in the same sense. So, it is incumbent on me to clarify in what sense exactly I am using the term. (Since I mean to engage in a debate with other philosophers, I shall attempt to use the term in one of the senses that has become common among philosophers.)

Dictionaries define what is "normative" as what involves or pertains to a "norm." So, to understand the various technical meanings that philosophers have given to the term "normative," we may start by exploring the meanings that have been given to the word "norm."[^1]

Philosophers seem to use the word "norm" in three main senses. In the first sense, a "norm" is something that in some way serves as a *model* or *standard*—that is, something that serves to *guide* people's thinking or behavior. The epistemologists John Pollock and Joseph Cruz (1999: 124) use the word in this sense when they speak of the "epistemic norms" that guide the processes in which we form or revise our beliefs. According to Pollock and Cruz, these "epistemic norms" are simply the procedures that we follow when thinking and reasoning competently. They explicitly compare the role that these norms play in our thinking to the role that *computer programs* play in guiding the operations of computers; and they insist that this role is crucially unlike the role played by an explicit set of rules in the thinking of a person who intentionally sets out to follow those rules.

**(p. 24)** In the second sense that is in use among philosophers, the word "norm" refers to what may be called *social norms*. Philip Pettit (1990) has proposed an illuminating definition of such social norms: a social norm is a *regularity* in the behavior of the members of a population that nearly all members of that population conform to—where this widespread conformity exists at least in part because nearly all members of the population *approve of* conforming to the regularity and *disapprove of* deviating from the regularity. This second sense of "norm" plays an important role in the branches of philosophy that describe and evaluate social institutions, such as the philosophy of law. For example, the "rules of obligation" discussed in the legal philosophy of H. L. A. Hart (1961: 85f.) seem to be social norms of this sort.

Arguably, everything that counts as a norm in the second sense must also count as a norm in the first sense too—since it is plausible that if a regularity counts as a norm in the second sense, it must also serve as a standard that in some way guides the thinking or behavior of the members of the relevant population. The phenomena that count as "norms" in at least one of these two senses seem to include: social and institutional rules—such as the rules of games, the rules that constitute legal systems, and the standards of etiquette —and publicly articulated policies and plans of various kinds, such as the rubrics of examinations; the commands of military leaders; or even a household's agreed shopping list. In recent years, these phenomena have been described as exemplifying "*formal* normativity."[^2]

Within ethics, however, a third sense of the term "norm" has now become common. When used in this third sense, a "norm" is a *general principle* about how people *ought* to think or act—where the term "ought" is understood in a sense that makes it appropriate to voice a distinctly serious sort of *criticism* of those who fail to think or act as they ought to (this is the sense of "ought" in which it seems to be *akratic*—in a distinctive way, *irrational*—to act contrary to one's own beliefs about how one ought to act).[^3] It seems that this third sense of "norm" emerged from the first, since general principles about how we ought to think or act can sometimes serve to guide our thinking or behavior. We can see the emergence of this third sense where Kant (1785: 390) describes the moral law as the "guideline and supreme norm for making correct judgments about morals." Here Kant uses the word "norm" as a near-synonym for "guideline," and so he here seems to be using it in the first of the three senses that we listed above. But even though he uses the term in this first sense, he is applying the term to the *moral law*—which is a norm in the third

sense as well, since the moral law is presumably a general principle about how rational agents ought to act.

"Normativity" in this third sense is sometimes called "*robust* normativity," to distinguish it from the "formal normativity" that we have discussed earlier.[^4] At all events, it is in this third "robust" sense that I shall be using the term "normative" here.

## **(p. 25) 1.2 Normativity as a Feature of Concepts**

In the third sense, as I have just characterized it, a norm is a general principle about how people ought to act or to think. My formulation is deliberately ambiguous between three possible ways of interpreting what a "principle" is.

**a.** On one interpretation, a principle is a *linguistic* item, like a sentence (a string of words of a certain kind), or perhaps a speech act (such as an assertion) that is performed by uttering such a sentence in an appropriate context.

**b.** On a second interpretation, a principle is a general *fact* or *state of affairs*—the sort of item that is built up out of individuals, properties, and relations, and might make such a sentence true (relative to an appropriate context).

**c.** On a third interpretation, a principle is a *proposition* or *thought*—the sort of thing that is built up out of *concepts*, and can be the object of mental attitudes of various kinds, such as belief and the like.

In this section, I shall argue that, of these three interpretations, the third interpretation (c) is what we need to achieve an adequate understanding of normativity. In other words, normativity is fundamentally a feature of thoughts or propositions (or of the concepts that those thoughts or propositions are composed of); it is not fundamentally a feature of linguistic items like words, sentences, or speech acts, nor a feature of the constituents of the world like facts or states of affairs (or the properties and relations that those facts or states of affairs are composed of).

First, the sentences that can be used to make normative statements typically involve highly context-sensitive vocabulary. The sentence "He should be working in the library tonight" may in some contexts mean that working in the library is part of a course of action that the person in question has *overriding reason* to take; but in other contexts, it may only mean that it is *highly probable* that the person in question is working in the library. In contexts of the first sort, the sentence seems to have a normative meaning, while in contexts of the second sort its meaning is, at least arguably, non-normative. Similarly, one may say that a person is virtuous by saying that she is "good," but when one says that something is "gone for good," one is not referring to virtue, but simply saying that the thing in question is gone for evermore; again, the first utterance seems to be a normative statement, while the second seems to be a non-normative statement.

In general, the mere fact that a sentence involves terms like "should" or "good" is not enough to determine whether an utterance of the sentence on a particular occasion

counts as a normative statement or not. In general, it seems that whether or not the utterance of a sentence counts as a normative statement does not depend purely on the sentence itself; it depends on the *thought* or *proposition* that is expressed by the sentence on that occasion.

**(p. 26)** Secondly, there also seem to be problems with the view that what is fundamental to normativity is a certain family of normative *properties* or *relations*—or the normative *facts* or *states of affairs* that are built out of those normative properties and relations. For the sake of argument, let us assume that intrinsically normative states of affairs do indeed exist. Even so, the mere fact that a certain statement has a normative state of affairs as its content does not suffice to make the statement a normative statement; and the fact that a certain thought has a normative state of affairs as its content is also not enough to make it a normative thought.

The problem is that a normative state of affairs—or a normative property—could be presented in thought or in speech in the *wrong way* for the thought or statement in question to count as normative. There are various ways of arguing for this point. Some philosophers, for example, accept a *reductive naturalist* position about normativity. According to this position, the nature of each normative property can be analyzed by identifying the property with naturalistic property—that is, a property that can be picked out in wholly non-normative terms. For instance, perhaps the nature of the normative property of *acting rightly* can be analyzed by identifying it with the property of *maximizing happiness* which (let us assume) is a naturalistic property that can be picked out in wholly non-normative terms. According to this view, the state of affairs of a certain action's maximizing happiness just *is* the state of affairs of the action's being right; and so it is itself a normative state of affairs. Thus, if you state or think that an action maximizes happiness, your statement or thought has this normative state of affairs as its content. But in making this statement or having this thought, you surely need not be making any normative statement or having any normative thought.

Some philosophers may respond that this point is simply a *reductio ad absurdum* of the reductive naturalist position. But even if that position is false, it still looks as if it should be possible, at least in principle, for there to be a thought or statement that has a normative state of affairs as its content, even though the normative state of affairs is presented in the *wrong way* for it to make the thought or statement into a genuinely normative thought or statement. For example, suppose that some extraterrestrial life forms visit Earth, and begin secretly studying human beings. These extraterrestrials observe our use of the word "good," and consider various hypotheses about what property this word stands for. Eventually, these extraterrestrials introduce a word in their language, "schmood," by stipulating that it refers to that property (whatever it is) that the human word "good" stands for. Then if the extraterrestrials have a thought that they might express by describing some item as "schmood," the content of their thought is in fact the normative state of affairs that the item in question is good. However, it could be that when these aliens have this thought, it is not itself a normative thought at all.

For these reasons, then, it seems best to understand normativity as fundamentally a feature of certain *concepts*—the *normative concepts*. Normative thoughts and judgments are thoughts and judgments involving these concepts; normative statements are statements that express such normative thoughts; and normative states of affairs and normative properties and relations are the items (if such there be) that make such normative thoughts true. These normative concepts include all concepts that can be **(p. 27)** expressed by the relevant uses of terms like "ought," and all other concepts of fundamentally the same kind. The question that I shall try to answer here is what distinguishes the normative concepts from the non-normative concepts, and what all normative concepts have in common.

## **1.3 Paradigmatically Normative Concepts**

In the previous section, I suggested that the normative concepts include all concepts that can be expressed by "the relevant uses of terms like "ought". But which uses of "ought" are relevant here?

As we have already seen, it seems plausible that the term "ought" can express non-normative concepts as well as normative concepts. When we say "He ought to be working in the library tonight", we might only mean that it is highly *probable* that he is working in the library tonight. When the term is used in this way, it arguably does not express a normative concept.

The same point seems to hold even more clearly of the word "should," which in many contexts can express the same range of concepts as "ought." Here is the opening line of Rupert Brooke's poem "The Soldier":

If I should die, think only this of me: . . .

This occurrence of "should" clearly does not express a normative concept. (One reason for thinking this is that this occurrence of "should" cannot be replaced by "ought to" without radically changing the sense.) Similar points hold of the words in other languages that can express the same concepts as "should" in English.[^5] So which uses of "ought" do express genuinely normative concepts?

Philosophers seem to have in mind a particular way of using "ought" as the use that expresses the most *paradigmatically* normative concepts. Specifically, it seems, they are the concepts that are expressed by what I shall here call the "all-things-considered practical 'ought.' "

What exactly is this kind of "ought"? This all-things-considered "ought" is not the same as any distinctively *moral* "ought." If there is a distinctively moral "ought," judgments involving this moral "ought" would be normative or evaluative judgments of a special kind judgments based on considerations such as rights and duties, the importance of being fair and helpful toward others, and so on. But not every judgment **(p. 28)** about what one "ought" to do is a judgment of this kind. For example, if I judge that I ought to buy a new

pair of shoes, this need not be a moral judgment. I need not be violating anyone's rights, or neglecting any of my duties, or failing to be sufficiently fair or helpful toward others, if I didn't buy a new pair of shoes. Perhaps no one else would be entitled to blame me if I didn't. But it can still be true that I ought to buy a new pair of shoes.

H. A. Prichard (2002: 126) claimed that the word "ought" has at least two "totally different meanings, the one moral and the other not"—where to say in this non-moral meaning that a person "ought" to perform an action is to say that the action is "the act which will lead to the realization of his purpose." Even if Prichard's claim is true, there seems to be at least one further sense of "ought" that is neither narrowly moral nor narrowly "instrumental" in this way.

Here is an argument for this point given by Garrett Cullity and Berys Gaut (1997: 1). Consider a case where you know that you are morally required to do *X* and not *Y*, while the act that will lead to the realization of your purpose involves not doing *X* but doing *Y* instead. In this case, you might well ask yourself, "Ought I to do what I am morally required to do, *X*? Or ought I to do what will realize my purpose, *Y*?" Neither of these questions seems equivalent to the trivial question, "Ought I to do what I ought to do?" So, it seems that "ought" cannot occur here in a narrowly moral sense, or in a narrowly instrumental sense; it must be occurring in a more general normative sense.[^6] For this reason, a statement of the form "*A* ought to φ" need not mean either that *A* is morally required to φ, or that it would best serve *A*'s interests or purposes for *A* to φ; it can mean that *A* ought to φ *all things considered*—that is, given *all* relevant considerations (which might include both moral and non-moral considerations), *A* ought to φ.

When understood in this way, a statement of the form "*A* ought to φ" seems at least roughly equivalent to a certain interpretation of the corresponding statement "There is conclusive reason for *A* to φ" or "*A* has most reason to φ."[^7] When the term "reason" is used in this way, it refers to what philosophers often call "normative reasons" (or "justifying reasons"). Such normative reasons are routinely distinguished both from "pure explanatory reasons" (such as *the reason why the bridge collapsed*) and from "motivating reasons" (such as *Martin's reason for flying to Ireland on Tuesday*). A normative reason for an agent to perform a certain action, or to have a certain attitude, need not explain why the agent performs that action or has that attitude, or motivate the agent to perform the action or have the attitude; it merely in some sense *counts in favor of* or *supports* or *recommends* that action or attitude.

**(p. 29)** We may take it as our starting assumption for investigating normative concepts, then, that the paradigmatic normative concepts are the concepts expressed by occurrences of this "all-things-considered practical 'ought,' " and also by this way of talking about what there is "conclusive reason" or "most reason" for an agent to do, which seems at least roughly equivalent to the all-things-considered practical "ought." In making this assumption, we need not commit ourselves to the thesis that there is exactly one concept expressed by all occurrences of the all-things-considered practical "ought." However, many concepts are expressed by the all-things-considered practical "ought," our key

starting assumption is just that these concepts are paradigmatically normative concepts, and any concept that is of fundamentally the same kind as these paradigmatic concepts is also a normative concept.

## **1.4 The Definitional Approach**

As I have just said, the normative concepts are those that are of "fundamentally the same kind" as the paradigmatic normative concepts. But what is it for a concept to belong to this kind? What unifies all the concepts of this kind? What is it exactly that they have in common?

It might seem promising to hypothesize that there is a single basic normative concept in terms of which all other normative concepts can be defined. This could then explain what unifies all normative concepts: all normative concepts are unified by their definitional relationships to this central basic normative concept. (Alternatively, it might be thought that there is a small group of basic normative concepts—perhaps two or three such concepts in terms of which all normative concepts can be defined; then the normative concepts would be unified by their definitional relationships to this small family of basic concepts.)

For example, according to T. M. Scanlon, the basic normative concept is the concept of a *normative reason*—the concept of a consideration that counts in favor of some action or attitude. As Scanlon (2014: 2) says, he is "inclined to believe" that "reasons are fundamental" in the "sense of being the only fundamental elements of the normative domain, other normative notions such as *good* and *ought* being analyzable in terms of reasons."

Other philosophers have made other suggestions about what the central normative concept is. For example, in some of his earlier work, Allan Gibbard (1990: 36–54) explored the hypothesis that the basic normative concept is the concept of what is "rational" or "makes sense." Other philosophers, like Judith Thomson (2008), might be tempted to think that the central basic normative concepts are the notions of what it is for something to be *good* as a member of a certain *kind*.

If a philosopher claims that all normative concepts can be defined or "analyzed" in terms of a certain basic concept, we need to know exactly what sort of "definition" or "analysis" the philosopher has in mind. There are in fact many different sorts of **(p. 30)** "definition" that could be in question here. For example, ever since Aristotle (*Posterior Analytics* 93b29–94a10), philosophers have distinguished between *real* definitions and *nominal* definitions—where a nominal definition is a way of conveying the *meaning of a word* to someone who does not yet understand the word, and a real definition is a metaphysical account of the *nature* or *essence* of the kind or property that is being defined.

However, our present project is an attempt to demarcate the distinctive family of *concepts* that count as normative concepts. So the kind of definition that we need to focus on are the definitions that articulate the distinctive necessary features of the *concepts* that are being defined. The crucial difference between concepts and properties is that con

cepts are the constituents of our thoughts, while properties are exemplified by items in the world. So, if the concept in question is expressed by a predicate of the form ". . . is *F*," then the sort of definition that we need to focus on will not set out to reveal what is distinctive of the property of being *F*—that is, what it is for something in the world really to *be F*. Instead, this sort of definition needs to explain the concept—that is, to explain what it is for a thinker to *think* of something as being *F*.

However, it is also widely assumed among philosophers that a definition of the concept of being *F* will give *non-circular necessary and sufficient conditions* for being *F*. That is, in effect, the definition will imply a universally quantified biconditional of the form "For all *x, x* is *F* if and only if A(*x*)"—where the phrase "A(*x*)" does not contain any simple term the meaning of which in this context consists simply in its expressing the very concept *F* that is being defined.

How could a definition of this sort explain what it is for a thinker to think of something as *F*? Various answers to this question might be suggested here. It might be that to think of something *x* as *F* is simply to think of it as being such that A(*x*). Or it might be that the ability to think of anything as *F*—as many philosophers would put it, *possession* of the concept *F*—presupposes an implicit grasp or appreciation of this definition.

In some recent writings, the proponents of a definition or conceptual analysis have claimed that possession of the relevant concept consists in certain "judgmental and inferential dispositions," and that the definition in question in some way "summarizes" these dispositions.[^8] Presumably, to say that this definition "summarizes" these dispositions is to say that the judgments and inferences that manifest these dispositions are exactly the same as those that could be made on the basis of this definition. So, the claim that any particular definition "summarizes" these judgmental and inferential dispositions could only ever be justified on the basis of a precise description of these dispositions. But if we had a precise description of these dispositions, it would be this description—and not the definition—that would give the most fundamental account of what it is to possess the relevant concept. Thus, if this claim is justified, the definition has no real significance as an account of the nature of the concept—that is, of what it is for a thinker to possess the concept. For this reason, I shall assume that if a definition of the **(p. 31)** concept *F* really explains what it is for a thinker to think of things as *F*, it must be because the definition must be in some way grasped or appreciated (whether explicitly or implicitly) by anyone who possesses the concept. When a definition meets this condition, I shall say that it is a *conceptual* definition.

Given that it is a conceptual definition of this sort that is in question here, the approach that seeks to define all normative concepts in terms of a small privileged set of allegedly basic concepts faces an obvious objection. There in fact seem to be remarkably few concepts possession of which involves any kind of grasp or appreciation of a definition or analysis of the concept. Perhaps possession of certain kinship concepts, like *nephew* or *grandmother*, involves implicitly grasping certain definitions of these concepts; and perhaps there are also certain highly theoretical concepts such that everyone who possesses

these concepts must implicitly appreciate that a certain *theory* serves as an implicit definition of these concepts.

However, such cases seem to be the exception rather than the rule. In many other cases, it seems that a different sort of account of our possession of the concept is more plausible. For example, our possession of many concepts involves some kind of *recognitional* ability—that is, an ability to form justified beliefs involving the concept on the basis of sensory experience—and this sort of recognitional ability would not necessarily put us in a position to grasp any definition of the concept at all. So, prima facie, it is not clear why it should be particularly plausible that there is any definition of the allegedly non-basic normative concepts that must be grasped (whether explicitly or implicitly) by all thinkers who possess these concepts.

Admittedly, even though there are few concepts that we possess in virtue of grasping or appreciating a definition in this way, it is not implausible that there are several conceptual truths linking different normative concepts together. For example, it has seemed plausible to many philosophers that it is a conceptual truth that something is admirable if and only if there is a reason of a certain kind for admiring it.[^9] So perhaps, despite the initial doubts that I have just canvassed, it may in the end be defensible to claim that these conceptual truths can be used to define all the normative concepts in terms of a small number of basic concepts.

As I shall argue here, however, this approach faces grave difficulties. One problem is how to account for the basic concepts in terms of which all the others are defined. One solution to this problem suggested by the so-called classical theory of concepts would maintain our possession of such basic concepts would have to consist purely in something like *direct acquaintance* with the property or relation that the concept refers to. This may well have been the view of ethical concepts held by G. E. Moore (1903). However, few contemporary philosophers are eager to defend the idea that we have direct acquaintance with normative properties and relations. In the absence of any credible account of how we actually achieve this direct acquaintance with normative reality, **(p. 32)** this idea seems to be a pseudo-explanation—a grandiloquent relabeling of the problem rather than a solution to it.

Some philosophers seem to claim that our grasp of the most basic normative concept might be an utterly primitive phenomenon, of which no further illuminating account can be given.[^10] This claim is especially liable to seem plausible if it is confused with the claim that this concept itself is one that has no non-circular conceptual definition. In fact, however, the two claims need to be distinguished. A colour-concept like *red* has no non-circular conceptual definition, but it is surely still possible to give an illuminating account of what our possession of the concept consists in—in terms of our ability to form justified beliefs involving the concept on the basis of our visual experience.

In fact, the claim that our possession of a concept is an utterly primitive phenomenon seems to make the very idea of our possession of this concept deeply mysterious: according to this claim, we somehow latch onto this concept—and onto the object or property or

relation that the concept stands for—as if by magic, in a way of which no further account can be given. (It is presumably because of the mysteriousness of the idea of such an utterly primitive grasp of a concept that the classical theory of concepts resorted to the idea of direct acquaintance with the relevant object or property or relation.)

Suppose, then, that there is some way of explaining what our grasp of the allegedly basic normative concept consists in. Then we should ask: why can't we give an account of *all* normative concepts in the same way? This would in fact be the way to give the most unified account of all normative concepts—not by invidiously discriminating among these concepts, privileging some as more basic than the rest, and then defining the non-basic concepts in terms of the most basic, but by interpreting them all as concepts of the same kind, and giving the same kind of account of them all.

In recent years, one version of the definitional approach has been particularly popular. This is the "reasons first" approach, which has been defended by theorists like T. M. Scanlon (2014). According to this approach, the notion of a *normative reason* for an action or attitude is the most primitive normative concept, in terms of which all other normative notions can be defined.[^11] In fact, however, this approach faces a series of especially grave difficulties. One simple problem is that relatively few languages even have a word or phrase that corresponds precisely to the English word "reason." For example, ancient Greek—one of the canonical languages of Western moral philosophy—possesses no simple equivalent of this word, whereas it undoubtedly contains a rich array of words that correspond to "good," "right," "ought," and the like. In effect, the only way in ancient Greek of talking about reasons is by using explicitly explanatory terms (of which ancient Greek has many), and talking about *why* a certain action or choice is right or fine, or about *why* a virtuous agent would act as she **(p. 33)** should. This seems to make it doubtful whether the notion of a normative reason is as fundamental a concept as some theorists have proposed.

More seriously, it is doubtful whether the proponents of this definitional approach have succeeded in even identifying the basic concepts in terms of which they propose to analyze all other normative concepts. The typical procedure of these philosophers is just to start using an expression from ordinary language—such as phrases like "You have a reason to do such-and-such"—in the hope that just by using these expressions, we can all latch onto the relevant concept. But the danger is that in fact the expressions in question are context-sensitive or polysemous, and as a result express different concepts in different contexts. Philosophers may then end up equivocating, shifting back and forth between different concepts without noticing the shifts.

In fact, it seems that this is exactly the situation with the term "reason" in ordinary English. I have already suggested that there is a connection between some of the concepts that can be expressed by "reason" and some of those that can be expressed by "ought": roughly, as I proposed, one ought to φ in a given situation if and only if φ-ing is part of the response that one has overriding reason to make to that situation. But there is evidence that "ought" is a highly context-sensitive term, and expresses different (though systematically related) concepts in different contexts.

The reason for thinking that the modal terms like "ought" and "should" express different concepts in different contexts is simply that we can easily imagine a sentence involving these terms for which there are two contexts, which do not differ at all with respect to the reference of all the other terms in the sentence, such that the sentence is intuitively true in the first context and false in the second.[^12]

For example, there are distinctively *agential* forms of "ought" and "should," which focus on the situation of a particular agent at a particular time; these are instances of what John Broome (2013: 22) calls the "owned *ought*." But there are also *non-agential* kinds of "ought" and "should," such as what might be called the " 'ought' of general desirability." This kind of "should" is illustrated by Wordsworth's poem *London 1802*, which begins with the lines:

> Milton! Thou shouldst be living at this hour: England hath need of thee . . .

In Broome's terms, this "should" is not "owned" by any particular agent: Wordsworth is definitely not asserting of any particular agent that *they* have the responsibility of bringing it about that Milton is alive in 1802; he is simply saying that in the situations that are in relevant way *most desirable*, Milton is alive in 1802.

Another distinction between different kinds of "ought" is illustrated by the phenomena that have been discussed in recent years under the heading of the "wrong kind **(p. 34)** of reason." In one sense, just as it is true to say that "You ought to be at the meeting by noon" because you have conclusive reasons to *act* in such a way as to make it the case that you are at the meeting by noon, it may also be true to say "You ought to believe that there is a largest prime number" if you have conclusive reasons to *act* in such a way that there is a largest prime number (perhaps because a demon has threatened to destroy the world unless you believe this). Even if, in this sense, it is true that you ought to believe that there is a largest prime number, there also seems to be another sense in which—because the proposition that there is a largest prime number is provably false—it is *not* true that you ought to believe this.

Finally, it also seems that there are both *objective* and *subjective* forms of "ought." For example, what you in an objective sense "ought" to do in a given situation may depend on facts that you are not even in a position to know in that situation, while what you in a more subjective sense "ought" to do is determined by facts that are in some way accessible to you within the situation in question.

Given the connections that I have proposed between "ought" and "reasons," it seems plausible that the term "reason" will be polysemous or context-sensitive in many if not all of the same ways as "ought": so, it seems, there are not just normative reasons, but objec tive and subjective normative reasons, theoretical and practical reasons, and no doubt more kinds of reasons besides.

In this way, it seems to me, the proponents of the "reasons first" approach have not succeeded in identifying any special central sense of "reason." Moreover, even if they have identified such a special sense of "reason," it seems at best arbitrary to claim that this sense of "reason" is basic, and all the rest are derivative. Indeed, discriminating invidiously among the concepts that can be expressed by these terms seems to be worse than merely arbitrary: it seems positively implausible, because the different concepts all seem to be parallel in a way.

In what way exactly do these concepts seem to be parallel? One obvious similarity is the fact that they can all so easily be expressed by the same term—while ordinary speakers never have the impression, in using these terms to express these concepts, that they are really using two different terms that are alike in sound, but differ in meaning (as "bank" in English means both *river bank* and *money bank*). Indeed, it seems that a number of philosophers have failed to distinguish between these different normative concepts.[^13] It seems to me that the best explanation of why these philosophers have failed to notice the distinctions between these concepts is that they are all concepts of fundamentally the same kind, forming a tightly interconnected family of concepts. This seems much more plausible than that these philosophers have somehow failed to distinguish between one of the privileged basic concepts and the other non-basic concepts.

**(p. 35)** For these reasons, I suggest that the definitional approach, which aims to explain what unifies all normative concepts by finding a single central basic concept (or a small set of two or three such concepts), in terms of which all other concepts can be defined, faces grave difficulties. In the rest of this chapter, I shall explore a different approach.

## **1.5 The Conceptual Role Approach**

According to the approach that I wish to explore, the distinguishing feature of normative concepts is their distinctive *conceptual role*. The basic idea is one that has become familiar—the idea that at least some normative concepts have a distinctive "action-guiding" conceptual role. This is the idea that I shall try to develop here.

This idea has been particularly prominent in the work of expressivists and non-cognitivists. By "expressivists," I mean theorists who deny that it is an explanatory fundamental feature of normative statements that they play any sort of representational or referential role, and instead claim that the meaning of these statements is to be explained in terms of the mental states that are "expressed" by means of these statements. By "noncognitivists," I mean theorists who deny that the mental states expressed by normative statements are fundamentally of the same kind as ordinary beliefs, and instead claim that they are in some way distinctively non-cognitive mental states, such as intentions or desires or emotions or the like.

In fact, I believe that the basic idea that normative concepts are distinguished by their action-guiding role is not committed to any such expressivist or non-cognitivist approach. On the contrary, my own view is that we can combine this basic idea with a resolutely representationalist and cognitivist approach. Specifically, my view is that it is precisely this action-guiding conceptual role of normative concepts that determines what property or relation these normative concepts represent or refer to, and that in consequence there is no difficulty with identifying the mental state that is expressed by normative statements with a perfectly ordinary state of belief.[^14]

For the purposes of the present discussion, however, we can leave this issue to one side, without taking sides in the debates between expressivists and representationalists, and between cognitivists and non-cognitivists. I shall simply outline a way of interpreting normative concepts that is inspired by this idea that they have a distinctive action-guiding role, without addressing the question of whether or not this approach is best developed within an expressivist or non-cognitivist framework.

On the face of it, however, this approach faces some challenging problems. One problem is that we apply normative concepts, not only to available courses of action, but more broadly to all sorts of performances, ways of thinking, and states of affairs. For example, when Wordsworth proclaims that Milton should be alive in 1802, he is not **(p. 36)** claiming that any *action* should be performed that would bring it about that Milton is alive in 1802.

A natural solution to this challenge is to broaden the basic idea so that it claims, not that all normative concepts are action-guiding, but that they are "reasoning-guiding." Perhaps, Wordsworth's view that Milton should be alive in 1802 guides him, not necessarily toward action, but at least toward a kind of *attitude*—the attitude of regarding it as part of the *most desirable* imaginable states of affairs that Milton is alive in 1802. However, this solution runs into a second problem.

This second problem is just that it is not clear whether there are any concepts that are not in some sense "reasoning-guiding." For example, from the premise "It is necessary that *p*" we can infer *p*. So why isn't the concept of necessity just as "reasoning-guiding" as any of the normative concepts—in the sense that the premise "It is necessary that *p*" "guides us" toward having a certain *attitude* toward the conclusion *p*?

To solve these problems, we will need to articulate a sense in which normative concepts are "reasoning-guiding" that is broad enough to include all normative concepts, but narrow enough to exclude intuitively non-normative concepts (like the concept of *necessity*). This is what I shall attempt to do in the next two sections.

## **1.6 "Reasoning-Guiding" Conceptual Roles: The General Idea**

In this section, I shall explain how we can generalize the idea of the "action-guiding" character of some normative concepts so that it can cover all normative concepts. In particular, I shall generalize the traditional idea of "action-guiding" concepts in three ways.

The first way in which I propose to generalize the idea that normative concepts are essentially "action-guiding" is something that I have already suggested. Strictly speaking, even if some normative concepts are essentially "action-guiding," it seems that these concepts would have to guide action by means of guiding the agent's *intentions*. Since the kind of reasoning in which we form and revise our intentions is known as "practical reasoning," the idea that some normative concepts are essentially action-guiding implies that these normative concepts have a guiding role in *practical reasoning*. So, a natural way to generalize this idea is to shift from focusing narrowly on practical reasoning to focusing on reasoning in general. In short, we should shift from the idea that normative concepts are action-guiding to the idea that they are reasoning-guiding.

This suggests that one way in which different normative concepts differ from each other is in the kind of reasoning within which they have a guiding role. Different kinds of reasoning can be distinguished by the different kinds of attitudes that can be formed by means of these kinds of reasoning: for example, intentions are formed by means of practical reasoning, beliefs by means of theoretical reasoning, and so on.

**(p. 37)** More specifically, I propose that every atomic proposition involving a normative concept in effect focuses on what I shall call a *reasoning problem*. [^15] In general, we can think of each reasoning problem as consisting of (a) a kind of attitude and (b) a set of alternative possible objects for that attitude. I shall assume here that the kind of attitude (a) that features in the reasoning problem is fixed by the particular normative concept in question, but the set of alternative possible objects for the attitude (b) must be picked out by some other constituent of the normative proposition. In effect, every thinker who entertains such a normative proposition must, in doing so, also consider or think about some such set of alternative possible objects for the relevant attitude.

For example, every atomic proposition involving an all-things-considered practical "ought" focuses on a *practical* reasoning problem—the problem of deciding what to do in a certain situation. Each practical reasoning problem can be thought of as consisting of (a) the attitude of *intention* and (b) a set of *alternative courses of action*, each of which might be an object of intention. In effect, every such set of alternative courses of action specifies an agent and a situation—specifically, the situation in which those courses of action are available to the agent. (So, in effect, some atomic propositions involving the practical "ought" focus on the situation that you are in right now, while others focus on the situation that Socrates was in during his trial in 399 BC; and so on.)

Atomic propositions involving other kinds of "ought" focus on reasoning problems of other kinds. For example, atomic propositions involving a *theoretical* "ought" focus on a theoretical reasoning problem—the problem of what to *believe* about a certain question. Propositions involving the "ought" of *general desirability* focus on reasoning problems that concern what states of affairs to welcome or to *regard as most desirable*. In similar ways, propositions involving other normative concepts may focus on other kinds of reasoning problems.[^16]

The second way in which I propose to generalize the idea that normative concepts are distinguished by their action-guiding role is designed to capture the difference between the more "objective" and the more "subjective" occurrences of normative concepts. Here we need the idea of what we might call an *epistemic perspective.* Each such epistemic perspective can be thought of as consisting in a certain set of propositions, and a set of possible beliefs or other doxastic attitudes toward those propositions. Every atomic proposition involving a normative concept refers at least implicitly to such an epistemic perspective. I shall assume here that (as with the set of alternatives that we have just discussed) this epistemic perspective is not fixed by the particular normative concept **(p. 38)** that is involved, but is instead referred to by some other constituent of the normative proposition.

It seems to be possible for thinkers to consider perspectives other than those that they currently occupy. (Indeed, it is plausible that this is one of the functions of so-called "indicative conditionals" in natural language, to consider the epistemic perspective that would result from updating the perspective that would otherwise be salient in the conversational context on the assumption that the conditional's antecedent is true.) In effect, then, according to the proposal that I am making here, entertaining an atomic normative proposition involves considering or thinking about such an epistemic perspective.

This enables us to characterize the difference between the "objective" occurrences of normative concepts and more "subjective" occurrences. Propositions involving "objective" occurrences of normative concepts refer to the *omniscient* perspective—a perspective that involves complete confidence in every truth and complete disbelief in every falsehood. By contrast, propositions involving the more "subjective" occurrences of normative concepts refer to non-omniscient epistemic perspectives—such as perspectives that are characterized by a significant degree of ignorance and uncertainty about the relevant questions.

I have proposed that each of these epistemic perspectives consists in a set of propositions and in a possible system of beliefs or doxastic attitudes toward those propositions. So, one feature of each of these perspectives is a certain role that is played within this system of beliefs and attitudes by the particular normative concept in question—the propositions involving this normative concept that are included, and the belief-like attitudes that the perspective includes toward those normative propositions.

The third way in which I shall generalize the idea that normative concepts are distinguished by their action-guiding role is by allowing for a range of different *kinds of guidance*, as I shall put it, that these concepts may provide. Formally, we may think of each kind of guidance as a *function* from the epistemic perspective (and in particular from the role that the normative concept plays in that perspective) to a certain *response* to the reasoning problem.

For instance, in some cases, in the content of the normative belief that forms part of the relevant epistemic perspective, the relevant normative concept is applied to a *member* of the set of alternatives that forms part of the reasoning problem. In these cases, the normative belief guides the reasoner toward having some kind of *attitude* toward that member of the relevant set of alternatives. For example, the content of the belief might be "I ought to buy a new pair of shoes," in which case the belief guides the reasoner toward having an *intention* to buy a new pair of shoes.

In other cases, in the content of the normative belief, the normative concept is applied to a proposition that concerns the reasoner's *attitudes* toward members of this set of alternatives. In these cases, the belief guides the reasoner toward directly *realizing* the proposition in question. For example, the belief might be "I ought to choose to buy a new pair of shoes," in which case the thought may guide the reasoner directly toward *choosing* to buy a new pair of shoes (and not toward having an intention to choose to buy a new pair of shoes).

**(p. 39)** A further difference among these kinds of guidance will account for the distinctions between (a) concepts of the sort that can be expressed by deontic modal terms like "ought" and "should," (b) value-concepts—of the sort that can be expressed by evaluative terms like "good," "better," "worse," and so on—and (c) other normative concepts, such as the concepts that can be expressed by talking about "reasons" in favor of various actions or attitudes, and the like.

In general, it seems plausible that the ways of using a concept that feature in the concept's essential conceptual role must all be *rational* ways of using the concept.[^17] So the ways in which, according to the concept's distinctive conceptual role, the concept guides the reasoner toward responding to the relevant reasoning problem, relative to the relevant epistemic perspective, must all be ways in which it is rational for the reasoner to respond to that reasoning problem, relative to that epistemic perspective. The guidance that each normative concept provides is a kind of rational guidance for responding to the relevant reasoning problem, relative to the relevant epistemic perspective.

Unfortunately, without more specific information about these "kinds of guidance," this characterization is not sufficient to distinguish normative concepts from non-normative concepts. Presumably, whenever we do reasoning of any kind, we respond to some reasoning problem in the light of an epistemic perspective. So we have not yet distinguished the distinctive way in which normative concepts are "reasoning-guiding" from the way in which all concepts are reasoning-guiding. In the next section, I shall propose a more specific account of normative concepts. Inevitably, this account will have several controver

sial implications—and unfortunately, I will not be able to defend these controversial implications here. Still, I hope that this proposal will at least illuminate the kind of theory that could be developed.

## **1.7 A Probabilistic Conception of Rationality**

One well-known and influential conception of rationality is essentially *probabilistic*. According to this conception, the relevant epistemic perspectives can be modeled by means of probability functions. (To simplify matters, let us assume that each of the relevant epistemic perspectives can be modeled by a *unique* probability function.) Together with a value of some kind, a probability function can be used to define a notion of *expected value*. According to this probabilistic conception of rationality, rational reasoning is always guided by some kind of expected value. In this section, I shall propose an interpretation of normative concepts that is designed to fit with this probabilistic conception of rationality.

**(p. 40)** Specifically, according to this conception of rationality, for every reasoning problem, and for every epistemic perspective, there is a certain kind of *value* such that a rational reasoner's response to that problem, relative to that epistemic perspective, is guided by the kind of expected value that is defined in terms of that value and the probability function that models that perspective. More precisely, for every reasoning problem and every epistemic perspective, there are *two* such kinds of expected value defined in terms of the probability function that models that epistemic perspective: the first kind of expected value is exemplified by the *attitudes* that constitute possible answers to that reasoning problem, and the second kind of expected value is exemplified by the *objects* of these attitudes that constitute possible answers to that problem.[^18]

For example, when the reasoning problem in question is a problem of practical reasoning, the first kind of expected value would be exemplified by the possible *choices* or *intentions* that the agent might make in the situation in question—while the second kind of expected value would be exemplified by the *acts* or *courses of action* that are the objects of these possible choices. The former value is a feature of the possible choices—the degree to which those choices are *correct* or *appropriate* or *rational* or the like; the latter value, on the other hand, is a feature of the available acts that might be chosen—the degree to which those acts are *feasible and choiceworthy* or *good things to do*. To simplify our discussion, however, I shall ignore this first kind of value, and focus only on the second kind of value, which is exemplified by the *objects* of the attitudes that count as possible answers to the reasoning problem.

Within this approach, it is easiest to start with an account of evaluative concepts—that is, of the concepts that can be expressed by terms like "good," "bad," "better," "worse," and so on—specifically, of the concepts that stand for values that are exemplified by the alternatives that are the objects of the possible attitudes that would count as answers to the relevant reasoning problem. I shall comment later on how this approach could be extended to cover the other normative concepts.

According to my proposal, each value-concept is tied to a certain kind of reasoning problem, and every atomic proposition involving this concept refers, at least implicitly, to a set of alternatives and an epistemic perspective. The essential conceptual role of the valueconcept consists in the way in which, relative to this set of alternatives and this epistemic perspective, the rational reasoner is guided in her responses to the reasoning problem by the relevant kind of expected value.

A more precise definition of the notion of expected value can be given in the following way. We must also assume that the propositions that this probability function is defined over include propositions that involve normative concepts. In particular, these propositions include hypotheses involving the evaluative concept in question, about the *degree* to which the alternatives in question exemplify the relevant value.[^19] **(p. 41)** Certain hypotheses of this form will constitute a *partition*—a set of hypotheses such that (according to the probability function) it is certain that exactly one member of this set is true. The expected value of each of these alternatives is the probability-weighted sum of the degrees of value that the alternative has according to these hypotheses, weighting each of these degrees of value by the probability of the hypothesis that the alternative will have that degree of value.

Specifically, the way in which the rational reasoner is guided by this kind of expected value has two aspects. First, the rational response (relative to this epistemic perspective) involves having attitudes that constitute a kind of *ranking* of the relevant alternatives, corresponding to the ranking of these alternatives in terms of expected value. For example, in some cases, this response involves a set of *preferences* of some kind that ranks these alternatives in terms of this kind of expected value. Secondly, the rational response will not only involve a ranking of this sort, but also (relative to this epistemic perspective) having one of the attitudes that counts as a possible *answer* to the reasoning problem: specifically, it will have involve having one of the attitudes the object of which is ranked as *optimal*, out of those that are regarded within the reasoning problem as available.

For example, the concept of *being a good thing to do, all things considered* is tied to a *practical* reasoning problem. With such practical reasoning problems, the rational response (relative to the epistemic perspective in question) will involve having the attitude of *intending* one of the courses of action that is ranked as optimal (out of the relevant set of alternatives).[^20]

In this account, the conceptual role of each normative concept does not just involve its conceptual role in relation to the epistemic perspective that the agent actually occupies. It involves its conceptual role in relation to any epistemic perspective that the agent can think about. Of course, if the reasoner does not actually occupy an epistemic perspective, but only considers or thinks about that perspective, then the kind of expected value defined by the probability function that models that perspective will only guide the reasoner toward a sort of *conditional* response to the reasoning problem. For example, she will not have an unconditional intention to take one of the courses of action that counts as optimal in terms of this kind of expected value; she will only have a sort of conditional **(p. 42)**

intention to take such a course of action—conditional on the assumption of this epistemic perspective.

On this approach, then, the essential conceptual role of the concept consists of a *general* role that the concept plays in relation to *any* epistemic perspectives that we can think about in the right way. This feature of the approach enables it to explain how we can understand normative propositions that refer to (or quantify over) any such epistemic perspectives whatsoever. This is how the approach gives a unified account of both "objective" and "subjective" occurrences of normative concepts.[^21] On this approach, they are occurrences of the very same concept, relativized to different epistemic perspectives: "objective" occurrences involve the normative concept's being relativized to the omniscient epistemic perspective, while a more "subjective" occurrence involves the normative concept's being relativized to a non-omniscient epistemic perspective, which incorporates some degree of uncertainty and ignorance about the relevant questions.

According to my proposal, then, this is, in general, the distinctive conceptual role of the normative concepts that stand for the kinds of value that are exemplified the alternatives that are the objects of the attitudes that are possible answers to the underlying reasoning problem. As mentioned above, these concepts can be expressed by evaluative terms like "good" and "better" and the like.

The simplest way of characterizing the conceptual role of other normative concepts will be in terms of their inferential relations to these evaluative concepts. For example, the normative concepts that can be expressed by "ought" and "should" may all just be in effect notions of what is *necessary* for what is *optimal* in terms of such a value (out of the relevant range of alternatives). There will be many different concepts of this kind, depending on the different sort of "optimality" and "necessity" that is involved.

The distinctive conceptual role of the concepts that are expressed by terms such as "reason" or the like can be characterized in such a way as to make these concepts in effect into notions of factors that play a certain kind of *explanatory* role in relation to certain facts concerning these values. This may either be the explanatory role of contributing toward making it the case that some item exemplifies a value to some degree, or it may be the explanatory role of being a factor that a good reasoner would respond to in reasoning well. These—I propose—are the concepts that can be expressed by speaking of normative reasons for actions or attitudes.[^22] In this way, we can sketch an account of the distinctive conceptual roles of all normative concepts, in terms of this probabilistic conception of rationality.

As I have mentioned already, this account of normative concepts will be undeniably controversial. There are several reasons for this. One way in which this account is controversial is that it incorporates a maximizing and possibilist conception of the concepts that are expressed by deontic modal terms like "ought." This is the interpretation of **(p. 43)** "ought" as what is (in the relevant way) necessary for what is (in the relevant way) optimal. This approach need not take evaluative notions to be "prior to" the concepts that can be expressed by "ought" (there is, for example, no suggestion that anyone could possess

the relevant value-concepts without also being capable of deploying the kind of concepts that are expressed by "ought"). Nonetheless, on this approach, evaluative notions have a big role in explaining the concepts that are expressed by "ought."

Some philosophers might think that for these reasons, this account of normative concepts is committed to a questionable kind of "consequentialism" or "teleology" about "ought." In my view, this is a mistaken interpretation of this account. The account has nowhere used the notion of the "consequences" of any item, nor has the account anywhere committed itself to the principle that the fundamental bearers of value are whole possible worlds, while other items have value only insofar as they in some way promote or raise the chances of such possible worlds. On the contrary, the account presupposes that the relevant values are directly instantiated by the relevant alternatives themselves (not just by their "consequences"). In addition, the relevant kind of value can also be both agentand time-relative; it does not have to be the kind of agent-neutral value that has typically been invoked by consequentialists in ethics. Much more needs to be said to give an illuminating explanation of why this account is not committed to controversial forms of consequentialism. But the features of the account just highlighted should provide the beginnings of such an explanation.

As it has been stated so far, this account also assumes that every sort of value comes in "degrees" that can be measured on an interval scale. This assumption is undoubtedly controversial, but fortunately, it seems possible to relax this assumption. We need only assume that the epistemic perspective's degrees of belief in hypotheses about the value in question define *some* kind of expected value. It may be that strictly speaking, there is no unique real-valued expected value function that guides the rational reasoner, but only a looser collection of facts about this sort of expected value. Formally, we could model this looser collection of facts by means of a *set* of real-valued functions of the kind that I have described—the set of real-valued functions that are compatible with everything that is represented in the epistemic perspective itself. This should make it less controversial to claim that the distinctive conceptual role of these value-concepts is to guide the reasoner by means of a kind of expected value.

Finally, a further way in which this account is controversial is that, strictly speaking, it is inconsistent with the classical version of decision theory. According to orthodox decision theory, rational preferences and choices are guided by expected *utility*, where the notion of utility is meant to be, not a normative or evaluative concept of any kind, but a purely psychological concept—a measure of subjective preference. Expected utility is not defined in the way in which I have defined expected value—in terms of degrees of belief in hypotheses about utility itself. On the contrary, it is defined in terms of degrees of belief about propositions of other kinds, together with the agent's degrees of subjective preference for those propositions.[^23]

**(p. 44)** In fact, this classical version of decision theory faces a number of grave difficulties. Why should my subjective preferences have that kind of authority over me? Why shouldn't I sometimes resist these preferences, and follow what I believe to be best in

stead? These problems do not arise for the suggestion that a rational agent is guided by her attitudes toward propositions that involve a normative concept like an appropriate concept of what is "best"; unlike with a purely psychological concept such as "utility," it is built into the very nature of such a normative concept that it is what has the relevant sort of authority over the agent. In short, once we consider the suggestion that rational choices are guided by our attitudes toward propositions involving such normative concepts, this suggestion may seem more plausible than the classical theory that rational choice is guided by expected utility.

## **1.8 Conclusion**

The account of normative concepts that I sketched in the previous section is undoubtedly controversial. But it would have some advantages: in particular, it could give a unified account of normative concepts, as the concepts that play a reasoning-guiding role of a certain distinctive kind in rational reasoning.

Other philosophers may reject this probabilistic conception of rational reasoning. But if they have any definite conception of rational reasoning, they should be able to characterize a kind of "guidance" that will make it seem plausible (at least to adherents of that conception of rationality) that the distinctive conceptual role of normative concepts is to provide rational guidance of that sort. So in this way, my proposal that normative concepts are reasoning-guiding concepts could in principle be detached from this probabilistic framework and developed in a different way. In light of the difficulties that I canvassed in the first half of this chapter for other attempts to give a precise general characterization of the domain of the normative, the thought that they are in some special way essentially reasoning-guiding concepts still seems like the most promising line of investigation to pursue.

## **References**

Broome, John (2013). *Rationality through Reasoning*. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Cullity, Garrett, and Berys Gaut (eds) (1997). *Ethics and Practical Reason*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

**(p. 45)** Finlay, Stephen (2014). *Confusion of Tongues: A Theory of Normative Language*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Finlay, Stephen (forthcoming). "Defining Normativity." In David Plunkett, Scott Shapiro, and Kevin Toh (eds), *Dimensions of Normativity: New Essays on Metaethics and Jurisprudence*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Gibbard, Allan (1990). *Wise Choices, Apt Feelings*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Hart, H. L. A. (1961). *The Concept of Law*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kant, Immanuel (1785). *Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten* [Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals]. Repr. in Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences (ed.), *Gesammelte Schriften*, vol. 4, 385–464 (Berlin: Reimer, 1903).

McPherson, Tristram (2011). "Against Quietist Normative Realism." *Philosophical Studies* 154(2): 223–40.

Moore, G. E. (1903). *Principia Ethica*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Parfit, Derek (2011). *On What Matters*, vol. 2. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Pettit, Philip (1990). "*Virtus Normativa*: Rational Choice Perspectives." *Ethics* 100: 725– 55.

Pollock, John, and Cruz, Joseph (1999). *Contemporary Theories of Knowledge*, 2nd edn. Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield.

Prichard, H. A. (2002). *Moral Writings*, ed. J. MacAdam. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Railton, Peter (1999). "Normative Force and Normative Freedom: Hume and Kant, but Not Hume *versus* Kant." *Ratio* 12: 320–53.

Scanlon, T. M. (1998). *What We Owe to Each Other*. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Scanlon, T. M. (2014). *Being Realistic about Reasons*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sidgwick, Henry (1907). *The Methods of Ethics*, 7th edn. London: Macmillan.

Smith, Michael (1994). *The Moral Problem*. Oxford: Blackwell.

Thomson, Judith (2008). *Normativity*. Chicago: Open Court.

Wedgwood, Ralph (2001). "Conceptual Role Semantics for Moral Terms." *Philosophical Review* 110(1): 1–30.

Wedgwood, Ralph (2006). "The Meaning of 'Ought'." In Russ Shafer-Landau (ed.), *Oxford Studies in Metaethics*, vol. 1, 127–60. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Wedgwood, Ralph (2007). *The Nature of Normativity*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Wedgwood, Ralph (2009). "The 'Good' and the 'Right' Revisited." *Philosophical Perspectives* 23: 499–519.

Wedgwood, Ralph (2017). *The Value of Rationality*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

## **Notes:**

[^1]: For some illuminating comments on the origins of the word "norm," see Railton (1999: 321).

[^2]: The terminology of "formal normativity" was introduced by McPherson (2011: §3).

[^3]: One early occurrence of this third sense in English is in the work of Henry Sidgwick (1907: 398).

[^4]: For an illuminating discussion of "robust normativity," see esp. Finlay (forthcoming).

[^5]: For example, consider the use of the German word *sollte* in the last two lines of Goethe's play *Torquato Tasso*: "*So klammert sich der Schiffer endlich noch / Am Felsen fest, an dem er scheitern sollte*." Here *sollte* clearly means something like "was likely to."

[^6]: Admittedly this argument is not uncontroversial. In particular, Finlay (2014: 150–75) would object to this argument. Unfortunately, I do not have time to address Finlay's objections here.

[^7]: I say "roughly equivalent" because, strictly speaking, I think that *A* ought, in this sense, to φ whenever φ-ing is *part* of what *A* has most reason to do—while it is not clear that *A* always has most reason to φ whenever φ-ing is part of what *A* has most reason to do. But this complication does not matter for our present purposes.

[^8]: For a clear example of this approach, see Smith (1994: 30).

[^9]: This is the central claim of the "fitting attitude analysis" of value (also known as the "buck-passing" account); see Scanlon (1998: 97).

[^10]: See e.g. Scanlon (2014: 2) and Parfit (2011: 272).

[^11]: For a more extended argument against the "reasons fundamentalist" approach of philosophers like Scanlon, see Wedgwood (2017: ch. 4).

[^12]: For a more extended discussion of the different concepts that can be expressed by "ought," see Wedgwood (2007: sect. 5.1).

[^13]: For some philosophers who claim (implausibly as it seems to me) that "ought" is not polysemous or context-sensitive in these ways, see Broome (2013: 12–25), who seems to think that there is just one kind of "owned 'ought,' " and Thomson (2008: 207–31), who seems to think that there is only one kind of normative "ought."

[^14]: See Wedgwood (2001, 2006, 2007: ch. 4).

[^15]: I say "every atomic proposition" because logically complex normative propositions may in effect *quantify* over such reasoning problems, instead of referring to any particular problem.

[^16]: I believe that this approach can be extended to the "purpose-relative 'ought' " that we find in such statements as "He ought to use a Phillips screwdriver to open that safe." Here the decision problem is *how (best) to open the safe*; the attitude defining the decision problem is an attitude of *conditional intention*—intending a course of action *as* a means of opening the safe, *conditionally* on the hypothesized intention of opening the safe; the relevant possible objects of this attitude are the various courses of action available to the relevant agent at the relevant time. (Many philosophers would interpret this kind of "ought" as exemplifying merely "*formal* normativity," but it is not obvious to me that interpretation is correct.)

[^17]: For more on this general approach to giving an account of the nature of a concept, see Wedgwood (2007: ch. 4).

[^18]: For a brief discussion of the distinction between these two kinds of normative concepts, see Wedgwood (2009: 508 and 516).

[^19]: If every atomic normative proposition refers, at least implicitly, to an epistemic perspective, we need to specify which perspectives are referred to in the normative propositions that themselves form part of the content of that epistemic perspective. The simplest approach is to suppose that it is always the *omniscient* perspective—which is modeled by the probability function that assigns 1 to every truth and 0 to every falsehood. In a sense, then, every epistemic perspective involves speculating, with greater or lesser degrees of confidence, about what the omniscient perspective would be. (It is possible to generalize the approach further, but I shall not attempt at this point to explain all the technicalities that would be involved.)

[^20]: As I suggested in n. 16, the purpose-relative normative concepts—like the concept of *being a good way of opening the safe*—is tied to a kind of purpose-relative reasoning problem—reasoning about how best to achieve the relevant end *E* (conditionally on the hypothesized intention of achieving *E*). Otherwise, however, *mutatis mutandis*, it seems that the account of these purpose-relative normative concepts can parallel the account that I have just suggested for the all-things-considered practical normative concepts.

[^21]: I now believe that this approach is preferable to the one that I took in my earlier work (Wedgwood 2007: sect. 5.2)

[^22]: See Wedgwood (2017: ch. 4) for a more extensive discussion of how to interpret the concepts that can be expressed by the term "reason."

[^23]: Here is a further objection: it may seem that rational believers are guided by their expectations of the *truth-values* of the propositions that are the objects of their belief, and one might wonder whether the concept of truth—a normative notion. But perhaps it is not implausible that there is a normative notion of truth—a notion of the feature of a proposition that makes it objectively correct to believe it—and that this is the notion that we would possess in virtue of our ability to be guided in our beliefs by expectations of truthvalues.

---

