## 8. Authority and Second-Personal Reasons for Acting

In SPS,[^1] I argue that a distinctive kind of reason for acting, a second-personal reason, is an ineliminable aspect of many central moral categories, including rights, moral responsibility, moral obligation, respect for and the dignity of persons, and the very concept of moral agent or person itself. Second-personal reasons are distinguished from reasons of other kinds by their conceptual relations to authoritative claims and demands that must be able to be addressed to those to whom they apply (second-personally, as it were). I have argued, more specifically, that there are four interdefinable, irreducibly secondpersonal notions: the authority to make a claim or demand, a valid (authoritative) claim or demand, accountability or responsibility to someone (with the relevant authority), and a second-personal reason for acting (that is, for complying with an authoritative claim or legitimate demand and so discharging the responsibility). Each one of these notions entails the other three, and no proposition that does not already involve one of these four concepts can entail any that does.

Call the authority I am concerned with practical authority to distinguish it from various forms of epistemic authority or expertise, including the kind of authority on practical matters a trusted adviser might have. A challenge that can be posed to my irreducibility thesis is that it is possible to establish claims to practical authority by invoking solely non-second-personal reasons. In what follows, I consider Joseph Raz's influential normal justification thesis according to which claims to practical authority can be established by showing that an "alleged subject" is likely to comply better with reasons that apply to him independently already if he accepts the directives of an alleged authority as binding and tries to follow them than he would if he were to act on his own assessment of independent reasons (Raz 1986: 53). I shall argue that the normal justification thesis does not hold for practical authority as I propose to understand it;[^2] moreover, that the correct diagnosis of why it does not shows that both practical authority and reasons that are conceptually related to it are irreducibly second personal.

[^1]: Darwall 2006. 
[^2]: Or more cautiously, any cases where it may hold will be by virtue of recourse to reasons that are themselves already within the circle of second-personal concepts (i.e., second-personal reasons).

Let me try to get the intuitive idea of a second-personal reason across with an example. Compare, first, two different ways in which you might try to give someone a reason to stop causing you pain, say, to remove his foot from on top of yours.

One would be to get him to have sympathetic concern for you in your plight and to want you to be free of pain. In desiring this, he would see relief of your pain as a better way for the world to be, a possible outcome or state that, as Moore put it, "ought to exist for its own sake" (Moore 1993: 34). And he would most naturally see his desire, not as the source of the reason, but as a kind of access to an agent-neutral (and state-of-the-world-regarding) reason for removing his foot that is there anyway.[^3] The reason would not be essentially for him as the agent causing another person pain. It would apparently exist, most fundamentally, for anyone who is in a position to bring about the state of relief of your pain, and therefore for him, since he is well placed to do so.[^4] Finally, in "giving" him the reason in this way, you might not need to address or relate to him in any way at all. Anything that would get him to see your being in pain as a bad thing, like an unaddressed grimace or whimper, might serve. In no sense, not even epistemic, need he be taking any reason to move his foot on your authority.

Alternatively, you might lay a claim or address a purportedly valid demand. You might say something that asserts or implies your authority to claim or demand that he move his foot and that simultaneously expresses this demand. You might demand this as the person whose foot he is stepping on, thereby claiming and exercising what you take to be a right against him. Or you might demand it as a representative of the moral community, whose members understand themselves as holding themselves and one another to a (moral) obligation or demand not to step on each other's feet. Or you might do both simultaneously. Whichever, the reason you would address would be agent-relative rather than agent-neutral. It would concern, most fundamentally, your addressee's relations to others, in this case, that his keeping his foot on yours causes another person pain, causes inconvenience, and so on, and that this is something we can and do reasonably demand that people not do. The reason would not be addressed to him as someone who is simply in a position to alter a bad state. If he could stop, say, two others from causing an identical gratuitous pain by the shocking spectacle of keeping his foot firmly planted on yours, this second, claim-based reason would not recommend that he do so. The reason would be addressed to him as someone who is a person causing gratuitous pain to another person, something we persons normally assume we have the authority to demand that persons not do to others.

[^3]: On this point, see Darwall 1983; Bond 1983; Pettit and Smith 1990; Quinn 1993; Hampton 1998a; Scanlon 1998: 41–55; and Dancy 2000. Agent-neutral reasons contrast with agent-relative reasons, those whose formulation includes an ineliminable reference to the agent for whom they are reasons (like "that it will keep a promise I made," "that it will avoid harm to others, i.e., people other than me," and so on). Agent-neutral reasons can be stated without such a reference: "that it would prevent some pain from occurring to someone (or some being)." On the distinction between agent-relative (also called "subjective" or "agent-centered") and agent-neutral (also called "objective") reasons, principles, values, etc., see Nagel 1970; Scheffler 1982; Parfit 1984; Nagel 1986; Darwall 1986; McNaughton and Rawling 1991; and Ridge 2005. <br> I argue for the claim that sympathetic concern involves its seeming that there are agent-neutral reasons to further someone's welfare in Darwall 2002: 68–72. I do not deny, of course, that someone who already accepted various agent-relative norms might not be moved, through empathy and sympathy, to feel some special responsibility for relieving the pain. My point is that this would not come through sympathy alone. 

[^4]: Roughly speaking, again, a reason is agent-neutral if it can be formulated without essential reference to the agent (as such); otherwise it is agent-relative. It should also be noted that superficially agent-relative reasons may be grounded more deeply in agent-neutral considerations and values, and/or vice versa. For example, rule-utilitarianism holds that rules of right conduct include agent-relative principles, for example, those defining rights of promise and contract, on grounds of overall agent-neutral value.

What is important for our purposes is that someone can sensibly accept this second reason for moving his foot, one embodied in your claim or demand, only if he also accepts your authority to demand this of him (second-personally). That is just what it is to accept something as a valid claim or demand. And if he accepts that you can demand that he move his foot, he must also accept that you will have grounds for complaint or some other form of accountability-seeking response if he does not. And that third parties will have grounds for moral blame. Unlike the first reason, this latter is second personal in the sense that although the first is conceptually independent of forms of secondpersonal address involved in making claims and holding people responsible, the second is not. A second-personal reason is thus one whose validity depends upon presupposed authority and accountability relations between persons and, therefore, on the possibility of the reason's being addressed person-to-person within these relations. Reasons of this kind simply would not exist but for their role in second-personal address and in mediating our relatings to one another. And their second-personal character explains their agent-relativity. As second-personal reasons always derive most fundamentally from agents' relations to one another, they are invariably agent-relative at the most fundamental level.[^5]

It is important also to see, however, that a norm or reason can be agent-relative without being second-personal; in other words, there might be a reason of yet a third kind that is agent-relative, like the second, but not yet a second-personal reason. We can imagine someone who accepts and scrupulously observes a universal norm of foot-avoidance but who also denies, consistently with that, anyone's authority to claim or demand his compliance with this norm, hence denies that he is responsible to anyone for compliance, even to God. Such a person might conceive of the norm as mandatory in the sense of entailing categorical, indeed supremely authoritative reasons, without accepting that he is accountable to anyone for complying with it. However, he could not then consistently accept that anyone has a right to his foot-avoidance, and in respecting the norm of avoiding people's feet he would not be respecting them as persons, since he would not be recognizing any authority anyone might claim as a person to demand anything, in particular, that he avoid their feet (Feinberg 1980; Darwall 2004). Neither, in my view, could he consistently accept that he is morally obligated not to step on others' feet since moral obligation is related to moral responsibility conceptually. It is conceptually impossible for one to be morally obligated to do something but not responsible for doing it, neither to the moral community, nor to God, nor to anyone. So someone who thought he was accountable to no one could not think he was morally obligated not to step on others' feet, whatever priority he might give to a norm requiring him not to do so.

[^5]: The formulation of the reason may not always be agent-relative, however. Suppose, for example, that the best way of grounding the Categorical Imperative is, as I argue in The Second-Person Standpoint, from the second-person standpoint in an equal authority to make claims and demands that persons presuppose when they address one another second-personally (32–5, 115–18, 239–42, 304–9). It is at least conceivable that what the CI itself requires is a principle of conduct that can be specified agent-neutrally. R. M. Hare, for example, believes that the CI can be seen to entail the sort of universal prescriptivism he favors and that this entails a form of act-utilitarianism (an agent-neutral theory). See Hare 1993. <br> I take the relevance of the arguments of The Second-Person Standpoint to the problem of justifying of agentrelative (or "deontological") constraints to be the following therefore. Justification from the second-person point of view can provide a compelling rationale for agent-relative constraints, like the demand not to step on another's feet, since, if I am right, any moral obligation or constraint is irreducibly second-personal, and second-personal reasons are agent-relative in their foundations. It is, however, conceptually consistent with this that moral obligations are agent-neutral in their content, and some presumably are, such as the obligation to help those in need. I am indebted to David Sobel and Steven Wall for pressing me to clarify this point.

There is thus a significant difference between the idea of an authoritative claim or demand, on the one hand, and that of a valid (and in that sense authoritative) norm or normative reason, or even of a normative requirement, on the other. There can be requirements on us that no one has any standing to require of us. We are under a requirement of reason not to believe propositions that contradict the logical consequences of known premises, for example. But it is only in certain contexts, say, when you and I are trying to work out what to believe together, that we have any standing to demand that one another reason logically, and even here that authority apparently derives from a moral or quasi-moral aspect, namely, our having undertaken a common goal.[^6] Requirements of logical reasoning are, in this way, fundamentally different from moral requirements. I follow Mill and a number of contemporary writers in holding that it is part of the very idea of moral obligation that moral requirements are what those to whom we are morally responsible have the authority to demand that we do.[^7] Clearly this is no part whatsoever of the concept of a demand of logic or a requirement of reason.[^8]

[^6]: Of course, these further constraints are frequently in the background, as they are, for example, whenever we do philosophy, say, right now. Because of the relationship you and I are currently in, each of us does have authority to call one another to account for logical errors, a standing that, without some such context, we lack. But however frequently that or some relevantly similar context obtains, the authority comes, not just from the requirement of reason, but from some other presupposed feature of the context. 

[^7]: "We do not call anything wrong, unless we mean to imply that a person ought to be punished in some way or other for doing it; if not by law, by the opinion of his fellow-creatures; if not by opinion, by the reproaches of his own conscience. This seems the real turning point of the distinction between morality and simple expediency. It is a part of the notion of Duty in every one of its forms, that a person may rightfully be compelled to fulfil it. Duty is a thing which may be exacted from a person, as one exacts a debt" (Mill 1998: Ch. V.sec.14). John Skorupski points out that calling an act "morally wrong . . . amounts to blaming the agent" and maintains that the idea of moral wrong can't be understood independently of that of blameworthiness (Skorupski 1999: 29, 142). Allan Gibbard quite explicitly follows Mill's lead in proposing that "what a person does is morally wrong if and only if it is rational for him to feel guilty for having done it, and for others to be angry at him for having done it" (Gibbard 1990: 42). And we can find versions of this Millian idea in other writers also (Baier 1966; Brandt 1979; Shafer-Landau 2003).

Now, as I have said, second-personal reasons are related conceptually to, respectively, the authority to make a claim or demand, a valid or authoritative claim or demand, and responsibility or accountability to. To appreciate the second-personal aspect of moral responsibility, consider Strawson's famous critique of "pragmatist" or consequentialist approaches to responsibility in "Freedom and Resentment" (Strawson 1968). Strawson argued influentially that social desirability cannot provide a justification of "the right sort" for practices of moral responsibility "as we understand them" (1968: 74). When we seek to hold people accountable, what matters is not whether some sanction is desirable, either in a particular case or in general, but whether their actions are culpable and whether we have any authority to demand their acceptance of a sanction. Desirability is a reason of the wrong kind to warrant the attitudes and actions in which holding someone responsible consists in their own terms.

Strawson's point is an instance of the wrong kind of reason problem. To be a reason of the right kind, a consideration must justify the relevant attitude in its own terms. It must be a fact about or feature of some object, appropriate consideration of which could provide someone's reason for a warranted attitude of that kind toward it.[^9] The (morally) responsible and the culpable concern norms for the distinctive attitudes and actions that are involved in holding people responsible and blaming them. The desirability—whether moral, social, personal, or otherwise—of holding someone responsible or blaming her, or reasons why that would be desirable, are simply reasons of the wrong kind to warrant doing so in the sense that is relevant to whether she is morally responsible or blameworthy. The former concerns reasons and norms of desire (even if from the moral point of view), and what is thus desirable is simply a different question from whether we are justified in holding someone responsible or blaming her in the relevant sense. The latter concerns reasons and norms that are distinctively relevant to these latter attitudes.[^10]

Strawson dubbed the distinctive attitudes involved in holding people responsible "reactive attitudes," with prominent examples being indignation, resentment, guilt, blame, and so on. And Strawson himself pointed out what more recent commentators, notably Gary Watson and Jay Wallace, have since also noticed, namely, that reactive attitudes implicitly address demands. They involve "an expectation of, and demand for" certain conduct from one another[^11] (Strawson 1968: 85, emphasis added). To feel a reactive attitude is to feel as though one has a warranted expectation of someone. Reactive attitudes, and actions that express them, must therefore presuppose the authority to expect and hold one another responsible for compliance with moral obligations (which must then be standards to which we can warrantedly hold each other as members of the moral community). Strawson claimed also that holding one another responsible with reactive attitudes presupposes that those we hold responsible have that standing as well. In holding someone accountable in this way, we "view him as a member of the moral community; only as one who has offended against its demands" (Strawson 1968: 93). In these ways, reactive attitudes can mediate mutual accountability.

[^8]: I am indebted to Peter Graham for this point. 
[^9]: Rabinowicz and Ronnøw-Rasmussen put essentially the same point by saying reasons of the right kind also appear in the content of the attitude for which they are reasons: the attitude is toward something "on account of" these reasons (Rabinowicz and Ronnøw-Rasmussen 2004: 414). As W. D. Falk pointed out, a favoring that is relevant to value is "by way of true comprehension of what [the object] is like" (Falk 1986: 117). See also Hieronymi 2005. 
[^10]: That is, to blame as an attitude. We also speak of blaming as an action, but even when we do we normally take it to express the attitude of blame.

It follows on Strawson's analysis that culpability and moral responsibility are secondpersonal phenomena in my sense. They implicitly involve the address of authoritative claims and demands and, therefore, of second-personal reasons. Moral responsibility is responsibility to—in Strawson's view (and mine), to the moral community or to one another and ourselves as representative persons. It concerns what the moral community can warrantedly expect and demand of each other and themselves. When we hold one another responsible, we express these demands and presuppose the authority to do so. So if Strawson is right, as I think he is, then responsibility to is conceptually related to the idea of authoritative demands and, therefore, to practical authority and secondpersonal reasons, that is, to reasons for acting that are thought to consist in or to derive from authoritative demands.

But the conceptual relations also seem to run in the opposite direction. If one person has practical authority with respect to another, then this would seem to mean, not just that the latter has a reason of whatever priority or weight—whether overriding, silencing, exclusionary, pre-emptive, or whatever—for acting as the former directs, but also that the latter has some responsibility to the former for doing so, that the latter is, in some way or other, answerable to the former. This point can be illustrated by altering our earlier thought experiment to imagine someone, call him now B, who accepts a mandatory norm requiring him always to do what someone in a certain position tells him to do. Suppose that A is now in that position. B will then accept that he must do what A tells him to do. We can imagine that B thereby accepts a reason for complying with A's directives of whatever weight or priority. B might think that the reason always overrides, silences, or pre-empts any potentially conflicting reasons. But B could still deny, consistently with all of that, that he is in any way responsible or answerable to A (or, indeed, to anyone). Were he to do so, he would seem also to be questioning A's authority over him. "Just because I always have overriding or pre-emptive reason to do what you say doesn't make me answerable to you or give you authority over me," he might consistently say. A cannot have authority with respect to B, it seems, unless B is in some way answerable to A.

[^11]: Gary Watson stresses this in Watson 1987: 263, 264. Note also, R. Jay Wallace: "there is an essential connection between the reactive attitudes and a distinctive form of evaluation . . . that I refer to as holding a person to an expectation (or demand)" (Wallace 1994: 19). See also Bennett 1980 and Scanlon (1998: 272–90).

We might put this point by saying that practical authority is not just a relation in the logical sense; it is a standing in a relationship.[^12] If A has authority with respect to B, then certain things follow about how A and B may and must relate to one another. If A has the authority to demand that B stay off A's feet, then not only is it the case that B has a reason of whatever weight or priority for doing so on the occasion of such a directive. B is also answerable to A for doing so.

This point is illustrated further by early modern theological voluntarist moral theories, like those of Pufendorf and Locke. The fundamental premise of such theories is that God has superior authority over his creatures. It is absolutely central to the voluntarist picture, moreover, that, because God has authority over us, not only must we do what God says, but we are also accountable to Him for doing so. Unless we were responsible to God for compliance, any sanction God might attach to violating His commands would amount to coercion by threat. Of course, it might be within God's authority so to threaten us, but voluntarists like Pufendorf thought it critical to distinguish between even such justified threats and God's authority over us, which essentially includes His authority to hold us accountable with sanctions. For us to be God's subjects, so subject to His authority, Pufendorf thought, we must be able to see ourselves as responsible to Him for doing as He directs.[^13] (As we shall see, Raz also distinguishes between direction by justified threats and by authoritative directives.)

I take it, then, that there is a strong prima facie case for thinking that the four secondpersonal notions I mentioned at the outset—practical authority (to claim or demand), valid (authoritative) claim or demand, responsibility to, and second-personal reason for acting—are interdefinable in something like the following fashion.

- *Practical authority*: Someone has practical authority with respect to another if, and only if, the latter has a second-personal reason to comply with the former's valid claims and demands and is responsible to the former for so doing.

- *Responsibility to*: Someone is responsible to another if, and only if, the latter has the authority to make some valid claim or demand of the former that the former is thereby given a secondpersonal reason to comply with.

- *Valid claim or demand*: A valid claim or demand is one that is within the authority of someone having practical authority with respect to another to make of the latter and that the latter thereby has a second-personal reason to comply with and some responsibility to the former for so doing.

- *Second-personal reason*: A second-personal reason is one consisting in or deriving from some valid claim or demand of someone having practical authority with respect to the agent and with which the agent is thereby accountable for complying.

[^12]: I have been helped here by discussion with Jules Coleman. 
[^13]: For discussion see Darwall 2003.

In SPS, I argue that many central moral concepts, including those of moral rights, moral obligation (and so, moral right and wrong), culpability, the dignity of persons, respect for persons, and the concept of moral agent or person (subject to moral obligations) are second-personal notions and so within the network of concepts just defined. For example, moral obligations are not just what there are moral reasons to do (of whatever weight); they are what morality demands and, therefore, that to which we can be justifiably held.

I claim, again, that the four interdefinable notions of practical authority, valid claim or demand, responsibility to, and second-personal reason are all irreducibly second personal. If this is so, then, to the extent that the moral categories I have just mentioned involve these notions, it will follow that they all have an irreducibly second-personal aspect also. In my view, this is a fact of great importance for moral theory. It means that no set of propositions that do not already involve the interdefinable second-personal notions I have identified can possibly entail any proposition of moral right, responsibility, obligation, and so on. To paraphrase a slogan of Bernard Williams's: Secondpersonal authority out, second-personal authority in (Williams 1985: 181).[^14] Of course, it may still be true that, for example, we are morally obligated to maximize overall utility, but this cannot possibly follow simply from the fact that the world would be better if we did. There must be some showing that this is something we reasonably demand of one another and hold ourselves and one another to through warranted reactive attitudes.

[^14]: Williams's slogan was "Obligation out, obligation in." One way of putting the thesis that moral obligation must be understood in terms of second-personal reasons is to say that the formulation in the text is not just a paraphrase of Williams's slogan, but that the point it formulates is the genus of which that formulated by Williams's slogan is a species.

#### The Normal Justification Thesis and Accountability

But what makes it the case that someone has practical authority of any kind (as I contend, for example, that beings with second-personal competence share a basic authority as equal members of the moral community or that one person has authority of some kind over another)? And what makes it the case that any claim or demand from someone to another is valid, one that that person has the authority to make on the other? If it is possible to justify practical authority fully in terms of reasons that are not themselves second-personal, then perhaps the notions I have identified are not irreducibly second-personal. Maybe their apparently second-personal character is a superficial aspect that can be explained away or otherwise accounted for at some more fundamental level.

This is the challenge that is posed by Raz's normal justification thesis which Raz formulates as follows:

> the normal way to establish that a person has authority over another person involves showing that the alleged subject is likely better to comply with reasons which apply to him (other than the alleged authoritative directives) if he accepts the directives of the alleged authority as authoritatively binding and tries to follow them, rather than by trying to follow the reasons which apply to him directly. (1986: 53)[^15]

Now the reasons that already apply to an "alleged subject" independently of the second-personal reasons putatively generated by some specific alleged authority may themselves be partly second personal, since they may be conceptually related to claims and demands of some other authority. This will turn out to be important if reasons of moral obligation are themselves second personal in the way I have claimed. On my view, moral obligations conceptually entail an authority all persons share to make demands of themselves and one another.

Of course, if the normal justification thesis is correct, then it may be possible to establish every authority, including whatever authority we have as equal members of the moral community, by reference to independently existing reasons. So it may be true that whatever standing we have to hold one another answerable for moral demands, like any other practical authority, can be accounted for by virtue of its being the case that we would do better, were we to accept this authority, at complying with reasons that apply to us independently of this authority. If, however, we can account for all practical authority by the normal justification thesis, then it would seem to follow that practical authority and the other notions that are conceptually related to it, although second personal on their face, are not irreducibly second personal.

Meeting the standards of the normal justification thesis is not, however, sufficient to establish practical authority. There are cases where one person might very well do better to follow someone else's directives where it seems clear that the latter has no claim whatsoever on the former's will and actions and consequently no practical authority with respect to him. And cases where an "alleged subject" would do better in complying with independent reasons where genuine authority does seem to be involved all also seem to involve some assumed background accountability relation that gives the authority's directives standing as second-personal reasons. In these cases, it is the latter that establishes the directives' authority, not the former.

It is worth pointing out that much of what Raz says about practical authority in The Morality of Freedom aside from the normal justification thesis seems well attuned to practical authority's second-personal character. First, Raz notes that authority of this kind is different, not only from power and coercive threats, but also from justified power and coercion. One does not exercise authority over "people afflicted with dangerous diseases," Raz notes, "if [one] knock[s] them out and locks them up to protect the public" even if one "is justified in doing so" (Raz 1986: 25). Such a justified use of coercion would miss, Raz says, an essential element of any exercise of authority purporting to give the person over whom it is exercised a distinctive reason to comply, namely, "an appeal for compliance" and "an invocation of the duty to obey" (25–6). This seems exactly right. Any such appeal would be an instance of what I am calling second-personal address. It would be an appeal to the alleged subjects to recognize the alleged authority and comply therefore with directives that are authorized by it. Moreover, someone can credibly make such an appeal only if he can expect his alleged subject to accept that the subject has some duty or obligation to follow his directives. Without such a duty or obligation in place, which an alleged authority cannot of course create by his own directives, no genuine authority exists.

[^15]: We should note that Raz says here that this is the "normal way" to establish authority, not that it is a necessary, or even a sufficient condition. Since the normal justification thesis poses a critical challenge to my irreducibility claims only if it is taken as providing a sufficient condition, that is how I propose to understand it.

Second, Raz makes an important distinction between the kind of authority that can give one new reasons for belief, including beliefs about what there is reason to do, on the one hand, and genuinely "practical authority" (as he also calls it), which can give one reasons for acting that one did not previously have, on the other. Raz rightly rejects a "recognitional conception" of practical authority according to which an authority gives agents no new reasons for acting, just new reasons to believe what reasons for acting they already have. Applying the "recognitional conception" to authority überhaupt gives rise to what Raz calls the "no difference thesis": "the view that authority does not change people's reasons for acting" (Raz 1986: 30). Raz points out that one way of seeing that the recognitional conception and no difference thesis cannot be correct is to reflect on the role that practical authority can play in solving coordination problems. There are cases where it is important for everyone to coordinate on one of two options that, so far as antecedently applicable reasons go, are equally choiceworthy. It is fine if everyone drives on the right, or on the left, but everyone had better coordinate on one side or the other. "A wise man," Raz notes, "can tell me which options belong" to a set of optimal choices, "but he cannot tell me which option to choose before it is known what others will do" (Raz 1986 30). This is, of course, correct. Raz rightly distinguishes between practical authority and the kind of authority that a trusted adviser can have in directing us to independently choiceworthy options. There is, as Hobbes famously noted, a distinction between "counsel" and "law" or "command" (Hobbes 1983: XIV.sec.1). Genuine practical authority can give those who are subject to it new reasons for acting by addressing valid claims or demands to those subjects. As I would put it, the relevant reasons are second-personal reasons; their validity depends on the alleged authority's actually having the authority he presupposes when he addresses the demand (or "appeal") for compliance.

Nonetheless, one might still think that what grounds practical authority and so makes it the case that someone can give reasons of this distinctive, second-personal kind are further reasons that are not themselves second personal. This brings us back to the normal justification thesis. The basic idea, again, is that someone earns practical authority with respect to another person if the latter would do better in complying with already applicable reasons were she to accept the former's directives "as authoritatively binding and tr[y] to act on them" than she would if she did not and tried to act on her own assessment of reasons. There is, however, a problem we face right at the outset in interpreting the normal justification thesis. What is it to accept someone's "directives as authoritatively binding"?

If we understand such acceptance to be accepting a directive as a valid demand in the second-personal sense I have been pointing to, then the alleged subject's own normative thought must then be interpreted in second-personal terms. In particular, we must suppose that she not only takes herself to have a reason of whatever weight or priority (exclusionary or pre-emptive, say), but that she also sees herself as responsible for compliance, that is, as answerable to the alleged authority. We must suppose that she, at least, takes it that the fact that she is thus responsible is in itself a reason for her to comply of this distinctively second-personal kind. But if this is so, then a version of Strawson's "wrong kind of reason" problem will arise from her perspective. Just as the fact that there might be desirable effects of treating people as responsible and their actions as culpable is a reason "of the wrong sort" for practices of holding people responsible "as we understand them," so also will the fact that an alleged subject would do better in complying with independently applicable reasons seem to her to be a reason of the wrong kind to think that she really is responsible for complying with some (alleged) authority's directives and therefore that his putative practical authority is genuine.

If this is right, then the beneficial effects of the subject's acceptance of an alleged authority may themselves be hostage to the subject's not also accepting the normal justification thesis herself, since the putative authority she accepts may then be susceptible, from her perspective at least, to, as Mill might put it, "the dissolving force of [the] analysis" that the normal justification thesis purports to provide.[^16] Were she to think that the only legitimacy the "alleged authority" can claim is that she would do better if she were to accept it, then this may tend to undermine her acceptance of it, and so its beneficial effects.

It seems more accurate to Raz's idea, however, to suppose that by accepting an alleged authority's "directives as authoritatively binding," Raz means nothing essentially second personal, but simply that the alleged subject takes the authority's directives as pre-emptive reasons, that is, reasons that are "not to be added to all other relevant reasons when assessing what to do," but that "exclude and take the place of [at least] some of them" (Raz 1986: 46). Thus A acquires practical authority with respect to B if B would do better in actually complying with independently applicable reasons if B were to treat A's directives as pre-emptive reasons in this sense.

[^16]: The reference is to Mill in a different context: "But moral associations which are wholly of artificial creation, when intellectual culture goes on, yield by degrees to the dissolving force of analysis: and if the feeling of duty, when associated with utility, would appear equally arbitrary; if there were no leading department of our nature, no powerful class of sentiments, with which that association would harmonize, which would make us feel it congenial, and incline us not only to foster it in others (for which we have abundant interested motives), but also to cherish it in ourselves—if there were not, in short, a natural basis of sentiment for utilitarian morality, it might well happen that this association also, even after it had been implanted by education, might be analyzed away" (1998, Ch. III.sec.97).

It is the pre-emptive character of the reasons that practical authority purports to create, according to Raz's analysis, that enables Raz to distinguish between genuinely practical authority and the kind of epistemic authority that a trusted adviser might have, that is, to make Hobbes's distinction between command and counsel. The only claim an adviser makes as such is on an advisee's beliefs about independently existing reasons and about what actions these reasons support, not directly on her will. "This is what I think you have good reason to do," an adviser might say, and add, "but I'm not for a moment telling or even asking you to do it," without canceling his advice or anything the advice implied. The improvements to the alleged subject's reason compliance that matter for the normal justification thesis are those that come, not from her being convinced by the alleged authority that there is sufficient independently existing reason to do as he suggests, but from her taking his instructions as directives that create pre-emptive reasons.

Raz does not consider what might be necessary for us actually to take (whether judge or in some less reflective way regard) someone's directives as giving rise to preemptive reasons. In my view, however, there is a problem here that is similar to the problem we set aside before of how it is possible to regard someone as having genuine authority if one holds the normal justification thesis. For as I see it, the normal way of taking someone's directives to provide pre-emptive reasons is to take it that he has practical authority in the second-personal sense I have been pointing to, namely, that one has an obligation to comply with his directives and is responsible to him for doing so. In other words, normally one must have authority to be able to give someone preemptive reasons by issuing a directive, and someone must normally regard one as having authority over them to take themselves to be given pre-emptive reason to comply with one's directives. I propose to set this problem aside also.

Now I take it that when Raz says that it is sufficient to establish that A has practical authority with respect to B if it can be shown that B would do better in complying with independently applicable reasons were B to accept A's directives as creating preemptive reasons, he means this to entail also that under such conditions A's directives actually do create such pre-emptive reasons. It is important to see, however, that these two theses can be distinguished. In fact, all three of the following theses are different:

- I. If B would do better in complying with independently existing reasons were B to treat A's directives as pre-emptive reasons, then B has sufficient reason so to treat A's directives.
- II. If B would do better in complying with independently existing reasons were B to treat A's directives as pre-emptive reasons, then A's directives actually are such pre-emptive reasons for B.
- III. If B would do better in complying with independently existing reasons were B to treat A's directives as pre-emptive reasons, then A has authority with respect to B (normal justification thesis).

It seems obvious that one could accept I without accepting II and accept both I and II without accepting III. Indeed, one could accept I and II without accepting the normal justification thesis even if one thought that A's having authority with respect to B entails that A's directives are pre-emptive reasons.

For our purposes, however, we can simply put aside any reservations we might have about I and II and simply stipulate that both are true.[^17] Our question will still remain, namely, whether the satisfaction of the conditions of the normal justification thesis establishes, not just that the directives of an alleged authority should be taken as preemptive reasons or even that they are pre-emptive reasons in fact, but that the alleged authority is genuine.[^18] 

There seem to be clear cases, however, some that Raz himself considers, where it is hard to see how the normal justification thesis could possibly hold. Raz asks us to imagine that "John is an expert on Chinese Cooking" and that if one wants nothing but "to prepare the best Chinese meal [one] can [one] should just follow John's instructions" (64). Let us stipulate also that one has no reason to do anything other than prepare the best Chinese meal and therefore, following from our acceptance of II above, that John's instructions provide pre-emptive reasons. The question remains, does John thereby acquire any practical authority over one? It is hard to see how he does. Of course, one would be foolish not to follow his instructions, but if one did not it is difficult to see why John would have any standing to complain or otherwise hold one to account. Raz says that those with practical authority "have the right to replace people's own judgment on the merits of the case." But what right could John have in such a case? Or recall Raz's remark that, unlike merely justified coercion, genuine practical authority involves "an appeal for compliance" and "an invocation of the duty to obey" (Raz 1986: 25–6). How, in such a case, could John warrantedly expect that one would have any obligation to follow his instructions, however foolish one might be not to do so? It follows from our stipulations that John's instructions are not mere advice; they provide pre-emptive reasons. But it is hard to see how that gives John any right to our compliance with his directives or us any obligation to comply with them.

Raz's position about cases of this kind is somewhat equivocal. He grants that we would not ordinarily think that John would have any authority "over" one even if one's Chinese cooking would "prosper" by following his instructions, but points out that one can accept the normal justification thesis and still resist that John has such authority because one might think one would enjoy self-directed Chinese cooking more or have other goals. No doubt, but we can simply stipulate that one has no reason to do anything other than prepare the best Chinese meal, and it still does not seem to be the case that John has genuine practical authority as the normal justification thesis requires (64–5).

[^17]: For the record, however, I might say that II seems to me, as I argue in Darwall 2010c, almost certainly false. As I see it, the kinds of case where pre-emptive reasons are most plausibly in play are those that depend on the existence of (second-personal) practical authority. 
[^18]: Of course, Raz might hold that A's having authority over B is no more and no less than that A's directives to B give B pre-emptive reasons. I consider this possibility below.

However, what if the reasons with which one would better comply themselves concern moral obligations? In such a case, an alleged authority would more plausibly appeal to an obligation to do as he directs. If the only way we can adequately comply with our moral obligations is to treat an alleged authority's directives as pre-emptive reasons, then there seems to be a sense in which it is plausible to suppose that we would be under an obligation so to treat them. Even so, it would not follow from this that the alleged authority himself thereby acquires any actual authority (beyond any he might have had already) to hold others to moral demands. After all, treating some appropriately programmed computer's "directives" as pre-emptive reasons might be no less effective, but neither the computer nor the programmer would thereby acquire any special practical authority by virtue of that.

Even if we could extend the scope of authority to an effective moral director by applying the normal justification thesis in such a case, this would still give us no reason to conclude that the second-personal appearances of practical authority can ultimately be explained away entirely by the normal justification thesis. The reason, as I argue in SPS, is that moral obligations provide second-personal reasons themselves (Darwall 2006). Moral obligations are what is warrantedly demanded of us, what we can warrantedly be held to. In the kind of case we are imagining, it is, at best, as if the alleged authority functions as a kind of representative who acquires any special authority he comes to have by virtue of the general authority to hold morally responsible. So even if the normal justification thesis tracks genuine practical authority in a case of this kind, it does so thanks to there being an assumed second-personal authority to hold people to moral demands in the background.

But suppose we attempt to explain the authority to hold people to moral demands itself by the normal justification thesis. If we try to do so based on improvements that would come in our compliance with reasons of other kinds then our moral philosophy will "rest on a mistake," in Prichard's famous phrase (Prichard 2002). Reasons of other sorts are reasons of the wrong kind for distinctively moral authority. But what if we say that moral authority derives from improvements that accepting it would make in our compliance with moral obligations themselves? How then are we to specify our moral obligations? If Mill and I are right, there is no way adequately to characterize what it is to be morally obligatory that does not already involve the authority to hold morally responsible.[^19] So we cannot explain moral authority itself by the normal justification thesis by claiming that we will do better in complying with moral obligations if we accept that authority, since nothing will count as a moral obligation unless there is already such a thing as the authority to hold morally responsible. I need not assume, of course, that it is impossible to designate moral obligations extensionally in non-second-personal terms, for example, with some list like: acts of kind A in circumstances of kind C1, of kind B in circumstances of kind C2, and so on. The point will nonetheless remain that the mere fact that we will do better in performing acts on the list is impotent by itself to explain the authority to hold morally responsible, since an act's being morally obligatory, and so on the list, is not itself independent of the authority to hold morally responsible and make demands of one another.

[^19]: See note 8.

Suppose, however, that Raz were to eschew talk of obligation in this sense "all the way down," and simply take the position that all he really means by a duty of obedience is that there are pre-emptive reasons for following an alleged authority's directives. Similarly, he might hold that the latter is all that it is for someone to have practical authority in the sense in which he has in mind. If we interpret the normal justification thesis as applying to practical authority defined in this way, it may seem more plausible. But it should be clear that practical authority so defined is not a thesis that entails anything about any right to obedience or about any obligation to obey, at least as we ordinarily understand rights and obligations. So understood, the normal justification thesis is simply a thesis about pre-emptive reasons. But if that is so, then it is not even relevant to the question of whether second-personal authority, demands, reasons, and responsibility, in the sense that I have delimited, can ultimately be accounted for in terms of considerations that are not themselves second personal.[^20] 

My conclusion is that the normal justification thesis poses no serious challenge to my claim that the four notions I have identified constitute a circle of interdefinable, irreducibly second-personal concepts. If we interpret the thesis as concerning practical authority, understood in second-personal terms, then it is either implausible or, in cases where it seems not to be, it borrows plausibility from the implicitly second-personal character of the reasons on which the alleged authority's directives are based (as when she directs us to comply with our moral obligations). And if we interpret the thesis otherwise, it just becomes a thesis about pre-emptive reasons for acting and so has no direct relevance to the possibility of grounding or otherwise explaining secondpersonal authority in non-second-personal terms.

Of course, even if the concepts of practical authority, valid demand, second-personal reason, and responsibility to I am pointing to are irreducibly second-personal in the ways I am claiming, that does not entail that any of these concepts are actually instantiated, that is, that there are any second-personal reasons, is any second-personal authority, and so on. So we might regard a position like Raz's as a kind of skepticism about practical authority of the kind I am pointing to and as offering a "reforming definition" in the style of Stevenson or Brandt in terms of pre-emptive reasons. I cannot, of course, establish here that the unreformed second-personal ideas I have described are anything other than what Kant calls "figment[s] of the mind."[^21], [^22] However, if what I have said here is correct, it will follow that if these ideas are mere figments, then so are the ideas of moral right, responsibility, and obligation and, indeed, the very concept of moral agent or person itself.[^23] 

[^20]: And it may also be the case, as I mentioned in note 17, that pre-emptive reasons themselves normally plausibly exist only when there has been a directive with genuine (second-personal) practical authority.
[^21]: At the end of Chapter II Groundwork points out that his arguments that autonomy of the will, the unqualified goodness of the good will, and the Categorical Imperative are mutually entailing has derived from an analysis of our moral concepts, and that nothing yet follows from this about whether any of these are actually realized or valid. That, he says, requires a "critique" of practical reason, to which he turns in Groundwork III and, of course, The Critique of Practical Reason. 
[^22]: I attempt to vindicate these ideas in Darwall 2006. 
[^23]: I am indebted to audiences at the Bowling Green Practical Reason Conference, Texas Tech University, Vanderbilt University, University of Toronto School of Law, Yale University, The Graduate Center at the City University of New York, University of Chicago, University of California at Irvine, Northwestern University, and Brugge, Belgium, especially, to John Broome, David Copp, James Dreier, Kyla Ebels Duggan, Margaret Gilbert, Aaron James, Shelly Kagan, Richard Kraut, Victoria McGeer, Douglas MacLean, Marina Oshana, Philip Pettit, David Plunkett, Wlodek Rabinowicz, Peter Railton, Arthur Ripstein, T. M. Scanlon, Mark Schroeder, Scott Shapiro, John Skorupski, Wayne Sumner, Candace Vogler, Gary Watson, Susan Wolf, and most especially to David Sobel and Steven Wall.
