## 9. Authority and Reasons: Exclusionary and Second Personal

In SPS, I argue that a distinctive kind of reason for acting, a second-personal reason, is an ineliminable element of many central moral categories, including rights, moral responsibility, moral obligation, the dignity of (and respect for) persons, and the concept of moral agent or person itself (Darwall 2006). Second-personal reasons are distinguished from reasons of other kinds by their conceptual connection to authority and to authoritative claims and demands that must be able to be addressed to those to whom they apply. I call these reasons second-personal to highlight this relation to address, which is necessarily always to someone (an addressee) and so in that sense second personal, even when the addressee is oneself, the public at large, or anyone at all, real or imagined.

More specifically, I argue that there are four interdefinable, irreducibly secondpersonal notions that together define a conceptual circle: the authority to make a claim or demand, a valid (authoritative or legitimate) claim or demand, accountability or responsibility to someone (with the relevant authority), and a second-personal reason for acting (that is, for complying with an authoritative claim or demand and so discharging the responsibility).[^1] Each of these notions entails the other three, and no proposition that does not already involve one of these four concepts can entail any that does. Whenever we take up a second-person standpoint and address or acknowledge a claim or demand, I argue, we necessarily reason within this circle of second-personal concepts. And I argue further that we are thereby committed to a basic secondpersonal authority we share with our reciprocal others as second-personally competent, that is, as beings able to enter into relations of mutual accountability at all.

In a more recent paper (Darwall 2009), I consider a challenge that might be posed to my claims about the irreducibly second-personal element in these central moral concepts based on Joseph Raz's "service conception of authority," specifically, on what Raz calls the "normal justification thesis" (NJT). The kind of authority that Raz and I are both concerned with is practical authority, as distinguished from various forms of epistemic authority or expertise, including the kind of authority on practical matters that a trusted adviser might have. Raz argues that the claim that one person (A) has authority over another (B), entailing that A has the right to B's obedience and B a correlative duty to obey, can be justified by its being the case that B would be likely to comply better with reasons that apply to him independently already were he to accept as binding and act on the directives of an alleged authority than he would if he were to act on his own assessment of reasons (Raz 1986: 53). In other words, claims to genuine practical authority can be justified if one would better comply with reasons were one to accept these claims and treat them as valid.[^2]

[^1]: I take "accountability" and "answerability" to be synonyms that refer to a distinctive kind responsibility to someone. There are of course other forms of (ethical) responsibility. Cf. Gary Watson's distinction between "responsibility as accountability" and "responsibility as attributability" in Watson 1996.

The objection to my irreducibly claim would then proceeds as follows. If the reasons with which an agent would better comply were not themselves second-personal reasons, it would then follow that someone could acquire practical authority over her owing entirely to non-second-personal considerations. So there might be good arguments to second-personal claims (e.g., A's authority over B and consequently A's authoritative demands of B) that do not depend on premises in which second-personal concepts and reasons figure in any way.

Against this possibility, I argue (in the paper just mentioned) that our concept of practical authority involves a conceptual connection to accountability and that satisfying the conditions of the Normal Justification Thesis cannot be guaranteed to secure this. The kinds of case in which the NJT has any plausibility, I claim, are those in which the reasons with which following a putative authority's directives secures better compliance already themselves assume background accountability relations that are critical to establishing the directives' legitimacy or authority. The rough idea is that the NJT is only plausible at all in cases where the relevant reasons involve background obligations of some kind or other and that the idea of obligation is itself conceptually related to that of accountability (I argue, ultimately to one another as representative persons or members of the moral community). If the reasons with which I will better comply have no connection to anything I am answerable for doing (independently of the directive), then it is simply not true that someone can come to have authority over me by virtue of the fact that I would better comply with those reasons were I to treat her directives as authoritative and follow them.

For example, I assume that I have prudential reasons to provide for my retirement that are independent of any obligations I might have, say, to provide for others whom I am answerable for supporting or of any obligation to support myself. It seems obvious that I do have such reasons and, moreover, that however important or valuable it might be for me to make my own choices, this latter value might not override (or sufficiently inform) the prudential reasons so that it could indeed make sense for me in prudential terms to put myself in the hands of a financial expert and simply follow her directives.[^3] Suppose, then, that I would better comply with the relevant prudential reasons if I were to do so and that there are no other reasons, or at any rate no sufficient reasons, for me not to do so. (We should note that the kind of case we need is not just one where I would do better to follow an expert's advice, that is, by treating her as an epistemic authority on the theoretical question of what there is reason for me to do, but where I would do better if I were to treat her as having practical authority over me, hence the standing to issue legitimate directives to me, in other words, as being in a position not just to tell me what I should do, but to tell me to do it.)[^4]

[^2]: For ease of exposition, I will sometimes use "better comply with reasons" as synonymous with "better comply with reasons that apply to the agent already, that is, independently of the putatively authoritative directive."

I argued that however desirable it might be for me to place myself in someone's hands in this way, even to the point of treating her as though she had practical authority over me, it simply would not follow that she actually has this authority. In order for her legitimately to claim authority over me, I would have to be answerable to her, and actually being answerable to someone cannot follow from the desirability (even, indeed, the moral desirability (in at least some senses of that phrase)), of regarding oneself (or of someone's regarding one) as answerable to her. Following Strawson's line of argument in "Freedom and Resentment," I argued that reasons that establish the desirability of treating someone as answerable to another person (or of his so treating himself), specifically, because he would thereby do better in complying with nonsecond-personal reasons that apply to him independently, are simply reasons of the wrong kind to show that he actually is answerable to that person (Strawson 1968). (Reasons of the right kind, I claimed, are irreducibly second personal.) So if, as I argued, authority entails answerability, then the NJT fails, and no objection can be mounted on its basis to my claims in SPS that central moral concepts, like those of moral obligation, responsibility, rights, and so on, are irreducibly second personal. No authority to make claims and demands can be based entirely on non-second-personal reasons.

Of course, Raz might for his purposes restrict the NJT to cases where the relevant reasons already entail some kind of answerability (although not, of course, the specific answerability of B to A that simply follows from A's having practical authority over B). I did not argue against this possibility, though I believe that, even so restricted, the NJT is unlikely to be true and that the right way to justify claims of differential practical authority—e.g., of legal and political authority—is within a contractualist framework grounded in the premise that all persons share a common basic (second-personal) authority to make claims and demands of one another at all.[^5]

[^3]: This is necessary to satisfy what Raz has recently called the "independence condition" (Raz 2006). 
[^4]: According to the NJT it is accepting "the directives of the alleged authority as authoritatively binding," that must produce the improvement in reason compliance. Cf. Hobbes's distinction between law or command and counsel (Hobbes 1994: XXV). 

[^5]: I discuss the relation between second-personal authority and contractualism in Chapter 12 of Darwall 2006.

And Raz might also simply reject my conceptual thesis that practical authority entails accountability and argue that the NJT applies to a concept of authority that lacks this entailment.[^6] I have my doubts that Raz and I really do have different concepts in mind, since he talks also of the authority's "right" to a subject's obedience and the subject's "duty" to obey. But perhaps these notions might be given readings that do not entail accountability also.

Indeed, Raz's preemption thesis suggests how this might be done. A core idea of Raz's theory of practical authority is that an authoritative directive provides "a reason for behaving as it directs, as well as an exclusionary reason, that is, a reason for not following (that is, for not acting for) reasons that conflict with the rule" (Raz 2006: 1022). Specifically, an authoritative directive "preempts" or "excludes" any reasons against performing any action it prescribes that the authority can be presumed to have taken into account in deciding to issue the directive.

This suggests that we might attempt to put the idea of accountability to one side and simply ask whether, if the conditions specified by the NJT are satisfied, this guarantees that the relevant reasons are in fact created. According to Raz in The Morality of Freedom, an authoritative directive creates a "preemptive reason" to act as it directs (Raz 1986: 42). In the Postscript to the 1990 second edition of Practical Reason and Norms, Raz says that "mandatory rules," of which "directives issued by authority are one subspecies," create "protected reasons," which consist in a "systematic combination of a reason to perform the act . . . required by the rule, and an exclusionary reason not to act for [conflicting] . . . reasons" that the authority can be presumed to have taken account of in deciding to issue the directive (Raz 1990: 191). I will follow Raz's earlier usage and refer to preemptive reasons as the reasons that a putative authority purports to create, that is, a positive (or first-order) reason for acting as the authority directs together with a (second-order) exclusionary reason not to act on conflicting firstorder reasons.[^7]

Even if, consequently, the NJT were to fail as an account of practical authority as involving a standing to hold accountable, it might nonetheless succeed as an account of authority as the capacity to create preemptive reasons. Similarly, a Razian might understand the idea that authoritative directives create binding obligations in terms of their creating the relevant preemptive reasons.

My object in this paper is to argue that the NJT fails here as well. Although I agree with Raz that the capacity to create preemptive reasons (that is, to create exclusionary reasons not to act on reasons that would otherwise have force along with a new reason that "displaces" or preempts the excluded reasons) is a mark of practical authority, I believe that this capacity itself requires the second-personal relation of accountability. In a slogan: "No preemptive reasons without the standing to hold accountable." If, as I maintain, the latter can be established only within a second-personal framework, it will follow that the former requires a second-personal framework also.

[^6]: As I point out in Darwall 2009. 
[^7]: For discussion on exclusionary reasons and their relation to preemptive reasons, I am indebted to Scott Hershovitz, David Enoch, Steven Wall, and Scott Shapiro.

#### Second-Personal Reasons

Before I proceed to attempt to make this case, I should say something more about second-personal reasons and the Strawsonian lesson, as I interpret it, namely, that reasons "of the right kind" for establishing accountability claims can arise only within the second-personal conceptual network.

Suppose someone is stepping on your foot. There might be various different reasons for him to get off. One would simply be the fact that he is causing you pain and that this pain is bad for you or a bad thing period. Whether or not anyone does wrong or violates others' rights by gratuitously causing them pain, there is some reason not to cause them pain simply in the badness of pain or in its being bad for the person who is subjected to it.

Suppose, however, that you take yourself to have a right (specifically, a "claim right") not to be caused pain. Were you to think that, you would have also to think that you have as right holder some standing or authority to claim or demand that people not step on your feet without your consent and, specifically, that the person currently stepping on your foot not have done so, that he get off, and so on (Feinberg 1980: 155). Moreover, you must also think that you have some standing, again as the right holder, to hold the person accountable for having stepped on your foot, for example, to object, to ask him his reasons, to demand an apology, to forgive him if he apologizes, and so on. Since the idea of a right is connected in this way to the (right holder's) authority to claim or demand and hold accountable, it is a second-personal reason.

The authority one has as a right holder is not, however, the only relevant standing in this case. Although the victim of wrongdoing has the distinctive standing to resent or forgive an injury, he has no special standing others do not have to blame the wrongdoer or to hold him responsible through (what Strawson called "impersonal") reactive attitudes such as indignation.[^8] This is an authority that anyone has as a representative of the moral community, indeed, that the wrongdoer has himself and that he exercises when, in blaming himself, he feels guilt.

If it is wrong to cause gratuitous pain, this is a reason not to do so, perhaps, indeed a conclusive reason.[^9] And if, as I believe,[^10] the idea of moral wrong is conceptually connected to accountability—what is wrong is what we are answerable to one another as representative persons for not doing—then the fact that it would be wrong is a second-personal reason for anyone not to cause gratuitous pain by stepping on your foot.[^11] Both reasons—that it would violate your right and that it would be wrong conceptually entail authorities to address demands (second personally).

[^8]: Though it is not distinctively up to the victim whether to have the attitude of blame, the victim may have a distinctive standing to blame the wrongdoer overtly. I am indebted to an anonymous referee for prompting me to clarify this point. 
[^9]: I argue for this claim in Darwall 2010a. 
[^10]: And argue in Darwall 2006.

Second-personal reasons exist only if the relevant authorities also exist to address and acknowledge claims and demands. The two reasons I just mentioned depend, respectively, on your standing as an individual right holder, on the one hand, and your and any other person's authority as representative persons or members of the moral community, on the other. Both involve an authority to make claims and demands and to hold accountable, although in different ways.

To appreciate the second-personal aspect of moral responsibility, consider Strawson's famous critique of "pragmatist" or consequentialist approaches to responsibility in "Freedom and Resentment." Strawson argued influentially that social desirability cannot provide a justification of "the right sort" for practices of moral responsibility "as we understand them" (Strawson 1968: 74). When we seek to hold people accountable, what matters is not whether some sanction is desirable, either in a particular case or in general, but whether their actions are culpable and whether we have any authority to demand their acceptance of a sanction. Desirability is a reason of the wrong kind to warrant the attitudes and actions in which holding someone responsible consists in their own terms.

Strawson pointed out what more recent commentators like Gary Watson and Jay Wallace have since also noted, namely, that reactive attitudes implicitly address demands. They involve "an expectation of, and demand for" certain conduct from the object of attitude (Strawson 1968: 85).[^12] To feel a reactive attitude is to feel as though one has a warranted expectation of someone. Reactive attitudes, and actions that express them, must therefore presuppose the authority to expect and hold one another responsible for compliance with moral obligations (which must then be standards to which we can warrantedly hold each other as representative persons or members of the moral community).

Reactive attitudes differ from other critical attitudes in that they don't merely have objects; they implicitly address their objects. Compare, for example, blame, indignation, or resentment, on the one hand, with (non-reactive) attitudes like disgust, contempt, or disdain, on the other. The former implicitly address a charge to their objects, while the latter do not. This is why the former, but not the latter, involve or presuppose a view of their objects as having some competence to understand or appreciate the charge.[^13] We can think someone an "egregious blockhead," in Hume's phrase, without thinking him capable of understanding our contemptuous criticism. To the contrary, a really egregious blockhead is incapable of seeing what a blockhead he is. However, we can only intelligibly blame and hold accountable individuals we think capable of understanding and internalizing our blame, that is, of seeing themselves as being to blame, thereby holding themselves responsible.[^14]

[^11]: Of course, the fact that it would cause gratuitous pain is a reason why it would be wrong to step on your foot. I believe, however, that the fact that causing pain in this way amounts to doing wrong is a further, second-personal, and conclusive reason for not stepping on your foot that is additional to this wrong-making reason. On this point, see Darwall 2010a. 
[^12]: Watson 1987: 263, 264. R. Jay Wallace: "there is an essential connection between the reactive attitudes and a distinctive form of evaluation . . . that I refer to as holding a person to an expectation (or demand)" (Wallace 1994: 19).

It follows on Strawson's analysis that culpability and moral responsibility are secondpersonal phenomena. Holding someone accountable involves an implicit address of authoritative demands and, therefore, of second-personal reasons. But the conceptual relations also run in the opposite direction. If one person has practical authority with respect to another, then this would seem to mean not just that the latter has a reason of whatever priority or weight for acting as the former directs, but also that the latter is answerable for doing so. Practical authority is not just a relation in the logical sense; it is a standing in a relationship.[^15] If A has authority with respect to B, then certain things follow about how A and B may and must relate to one another. If A has the authority to demand that B stay off A's feet, then not only is it the case that B has a reason of whatever weight or priority for doing so. B is also answerable to A for doing so. I take it, then, that there is a strong prima facie case for thinking that the four second-personal notions I mentioned at the outset—practical authority (to claim or demand), valid (authoritative or legitimate) claim or demand, accountability to, and second-personal reason for acting form an interdefinable circle of irreducibly second-personal concepts.

#### The Normal Justification Thesis and Exclusionary Reasons

We can turn now to considering whether the NJT provides an adequate justification for practical authority, specifically, of the sort one person has over another when she has the standing to issue directives to another that the latter thereby has some obligation to obey. Here is Raz's formulation of the NJT in Morality and Freedom:

the normal way to establish that a person has authority over another person involves showing that the alleged subject is likely better to comply with reasons which apply to him (other than the alleged authoritative directives) if he accepts the directives of the alleged authority as authoritatively binding and tries to follow them, rather than by trying to follow the reasons which apply to him directly. (Raz 1986: 53)

As I mentioned above, I argue in the earlier paper that if we take the relevant authority and resulting obligation to analytically entail accountability, that is, that being subject to authority essentially involves answerability, then the NJT fails, at least that it does so when the reasons with which the person would comply better are not themselves second-personal reasons. In cases where the reasons do not concern anything one is already answerable for, then the fact that one would comply better with these reasons if one were to treat someone's directives as authoritative and make oneself answerable to that person for complying with the directives cannot establish that one is accountable to her in fact.

[^13]: And it explains their distinct connection to the problem of freedom of the will in a way that other critical attitudes are not. 
[^14]: There are of course exceptions, e.g., blaming the dead. I am indebted here to an anonymous referee. 
[^15]: I have been helped here by discussion with Jules Coleman.

This, again, is the lesson of Strawson's "Freedom and Resentment." The fact that I would do better in complying with the prudential reasons concerning provision for my retirement if I were to put myself in the hands of a financial expert to the point of treating her directives as authoritative and myself as accountable to her for complying with them, cannot establish that I actually am answerable to her or that she has any standing to hold me to account for complying with her directives.[^16] We can simply stipulate that I have no better reason to do anything other than what is necessary to provide for my retirement, that this is what I have most reason to do all things considered, and it will still not follow that I would actually be accountable in such a case. However weighty the reasons connected with the desirability of providing for my retirement might be, so long as I am not answerable for doing what they recommend, these reasons are simply of the wrong kind to establish that I would actually be accountable. In Hobbes's terms, reasons of this kind are sufficient to establish good "counsel" but not "law" or "command" (Hobbes 1994: xxv.sec.1).

But suppose, again, that Raz were to maintain that whether or not the NJT fails for authority as essentially involving accountability, it nonetheless holds for authority as the capacity to create preemptive reasons? [^17] We can put to one side the question of which concept of practical authority is "ours" and consider whether if we take the capacity to create preemptive reasons as the mark of practical authority, the NJT succeeds for authority so conceived. In other words, is satisfying the conditions of the NJT sufficient (or necessary) to establish that one person has the standing to create preemptive reasons for another?

The Razian idea of a preemptive reason includes that of an exclusionary reason. An exclusionary reason is a reason that does not count in favor of or against an action in the way "first-order" reasons do; it is a "second-order" reason against acting on certain first-order reasons. The idea underlying Raz's preemption thesis is that in deciding what directives to issue, an authority will take account of first-order reasons, at least within some range, for and against actions that would be prescribed by directives the authority is considering and that an authoritative directive preempts the reasons for acting that the authority has already taken into account, specifically, it preempts or excludes the reasons for performing any action that would violate the directive. So an authoritative directive both creates an additional reason for doing what the directive prescribes that would not otherwise exist—namely, that so acting is required by an authoritative directive—and it creates an exclusionary reason against acting on any reason in favor of actions that would violate the directive, which reasons the authority can be assumed to have taken into account in deciding to issue the directive.

[^16]: Of course, she might acquire this standing if I put myself in her care, depending on how she and I understand the terms of the relationship into which we voluntarily enter. 
[^17]: Alternatively, Raz might hold that though our concept entails accountability, this is not an entailment we can adequately support or vindicate, and offer an NJT based account in terms of preemptive reasons as a "reforming definition" in the spirit of Richard Brandt or Charles Stevenson.

For example, suppose the state decides to impose a certain speed limit, say 65 miles per hour on a certain road. In deciding what speed limit to set, the state will balance complex considerations concerning safety, fuel economy, citizens' convenience, other economic factors, and so on. Once, however, the speed limit has been set, it is no longer permissible for citizens simply to make their own judgments about what speed to drive based on their own assessments of these and other relevant reasons. That is no longer within their discretion. The authoritative directive both gives them a reason to drive no faster than 65 miles per hour that they would otherwise not have had and a reason not to act on reasons for driving faster that they might have otherwise legitimately regarded as counting in favor of so doing, e.g., that they would thereby more conveniently arrive at their destinations sooner, are able to drive safely at a faster speed, and so on.

Suppose then we ask whether the NJT holds for authority as the capacity to create exclusionary reasons along with an additional reason for doing what the authority directs, which together comprise a preemptive reason? I shall argue that it does not. The conditions of the NJT are satisfied when a person would do better in complying with the reasons that apply to him already anyway were he to treat someone as an authority and treat her directives as legitimate. Now again, in my view, when we treat someone as having authority over us, we see ourselves as accountable to that person. But whether I am right about that or not, we are ignoring the element of accountability at this stage. Our question at this point is whether if someone does better in complying with reasons if he treats another person's directives as giving him preemptive reasons, this is sufficient to establish that the preemptive reasons actually exist. Is that sufficient, in other words, to establish the existence of a positive reason to comply and a second-order reason not to act on first-order reasons recommending non-compliance?[^18]

[^18]: For convenience, from here on when I say "if he treats A's directives as giving him exclusionary means," I will mean, "if he treats A's directives as giving him an additional reason for acting as she directs and as giving him exclusionary reasons not to act on reasons that might otherwise recommend against the action she prescribes."

It will be useful to have before us now the following three propositions to help us focus the issues:

- I. B will do better in complying with reasons if he treats A's directives as giving him preemptive reasons.
- II. There is reason for B to treat A's directives as giving him preemptive reasons.
- III. A's directives actually do give B preemptive reasons.

Now I am prepared to stipulate that when I is true, II is true also. We can simply agree for purposes of the argument that if someone would comply better with reasons were he to perform some action or adopt some attitude, then there is reason for him to perform that action or adopt that attitude.[^19] The question before us is whether if II is true, then III is guaranteed to be true as well. I believe that this is not the case. For III to be true whenever II is true, the reasons that speak in favor of B's believing that A's directives create exclusionary reasons, or B's regarding or treating A's directives as creating them, would also have somehow to make B's belief or way of seeing or treating things true or correct. And that is not generally the case. As D'Arms and Jacobson put the point, not all reasons for having an attitude are reasons of the right kind to show that attitude to be "fitting," that is, that it fits what it purports to represent (D'Arms and Jacobson 2000b). In this case, not all reasons for regarding or treating directives as creating preemptive reasons are relevant to whether the directives actually do create preemptive reasons.

For example, suppose that I would comply better with reasons for acting if I just had some false belief. Suppose, somewhat like Kavka's toxin puzzle, that someone will give me a prize enabling me to provide better for my children if I just believe, say, that the U.S. invasion of Iraq was an unqualified success in every respect. Assume that what I have most reason to do is to provide for my children, which I will be able adequately to do only if I form this belief and so win the prize. Clearly I would have reason to (try anyway) to form the belief (surrounding myself with relevant political propaganda and avoiding reputable news sources). But the reasons for doing so would not be reasons of the right kind to bear on whether the belief is actually true or credible. Only evidence can do that and pragmatic reasons for forming a belief are not evidence of a belief 's truth or credibility.

Admittedly, this case has a different shape than those where the conditions of the NJT are satisfied. In this case, the false belief is necessary to give me the means to accomplish what I have reason to try to accomplish. I might, after all, form the belief, get the prize, and then not actually end up providing for my children. Perhaps I would spend the money foolishly on expensive antiquarian books. But the general point nonetheless still stands, namely, the fact that one has reason to adopt an attitude does not in general make it the case that the attitude is true, correct, or "fitting."[^20] We might, therefore, reasonably be suspicious about whether if II is true, III will be guaranteed to be true also. Why should the fact that one has reason to regard or treat someone's directives as creating exclusionary reasons make it the case that their directives actually do create such exclusionary reasons?

[^19]: For the record, I doubt that this is true. 
[^20]: This, of course, is just the "wrong kind of reasons" problem.

Let us focus now on that question, and to vary the case, suppose that what B has most reason to do is to get out of bed at a certain time, say, 7 a.m. We can suppose, again, that B has conclusive prudential reasons for doing so and no better reasons to do anything else. One thing B might do, of course, is to use an alarm of some kind. Let us suppose, however, that the usual alarms do not work for B. They wake him up all right, but when they do, he then deliberates about whether to get up and invariably persuades himself (against, let us suppose, his better judgment) that he has more reason to stay in bed a little longer. Suppose further that there is no other technical fix to B's problem. For example, if he puts the alarm far enough out of reach so that he has to get out of bed to turn it off, the ring from that distance is not loud or annoying enough to get him out of bed.

As it happens, however, B has an authoritarian personality. Whereas some people have bumper stickers saying "Question Authority," B's car displays one saying "Respect Authority." And B is the kind of person who, were he a subject in the Milgram experiment, would administer shocks up to the full 450 volts (Milgram 1974). So B gets an "authority alarm clock." The clock has a recording of an authoritative voice that says "You must get out of bed now." And if B stays in bed, the voice says things like "If you don't get out of bed, you will be found in violation and made subject to the full authority of the state," and so on. Suppose that this works and that it is the only way that B can reliably get out of bed at 7 a.m. as he has most reason to do. And suppose that the way it works is by giving B an "authority experience," that is, it is by making it seem to him as if someone with genuine authority is ordering him to get out of bed, that he must comply or be in violation, and so on.

Now if what B has most reason to do is to get out of bed at 7 a.m., then it would seem that B also has reason to treat the voice as actually issuing authoritative directives that create exclusionary reasons, as his "authority experience" indeed inclines him to do.[^21] That is, B has reason to treat his authority experience as though it were veridical. But it is also obvious that whatever weight the reasons B might have to get out of bed at 7 a.m. and so to treat his experience as veridical, these reasons cannot actually make his experience veridical or even bear on its accuracy. They would be completely impotent to make it the case that the alarm's "directives" actually are legitimate or genuinely create preemptive reasons. When the alarm clock goes off and the voice speaks, B has the very same reasons to get up at 7 a.m. and, by hypothesis, the same less weighty reasons to continue to lie in bed.

[^21]: Of course, it might be argued that there is no actual directive in this case, but only the illusion of one, so that the letter of the NJT is not satisfied. While this seems a fair point, it also seems clear that the psychic mechanism leading to B's "compliance" is the same as might be involved in many cases of genuine compliance with actual directives, for example, in the Milgram experiments themselves, or in the case to be described presently. I am indebted to David Owens for this objection.

Granted, B has pragmatic reasons to respond to the alarm, on the one hand, and, on the other, not even to think about his reasons for staying in bed (since if he does consider them he is likely to act contrary to the weightier reasons and stay in bed). But this does not mean that he may not legitimately think about these reasons, that it is outside his discretion, or that the latter reasons have somehow been displaced, preempted, or defeated, only that he would be foolish to consider them. Clearly, the person who recorded the "authoritative voice" acquires no authority by virtue of the fact that B will comply better with reasons if he treats his voiced directives as creating preemptive reasons.

I should point out, however, that as Raz usually defines the general category of "exclusionary reason," namely, as a second-order reason not to be moved by or to act for certain first-order reasons, it simply follows from the fact that it makes no sense for B to consider his reasons for staying in bed that there is indeed an exclusionary reason in this case.[^22] But the existence of an exclusionary reason does not guarantee that a preemptive reason of the kind Raz thinks is generated by authoritative directives exists, as Raz himself makes clear. First, a preemptive reason involves an additional new firstorder reason that preempts or displaces the excluded reasons, and that is what I am arguing is not created in this case. And second, Raz himself points out that not all exclusionary reasons are "authority-based"; some derive straightforwardly from deliberative incapacities (of the sort, indeed, that seem to be involved here).[^23] "Authoritybased" exclusionary reasons, Raz says, derive from "a fundamental point about authority, i.e., that it removes the decision from one person to another" (Raz 1990: 193). I take this to be a conceptual claim about practical authority, rather than, say a metaphysical claim about deliberation and action. So understood, it can be interpreted as a point about deliberative discretion, about what we may legitimately take into account.[^24] In this sense, however, it seems clear that no authority-based exclusionary reasons are created for B. B remains perfectly free in this sense to consider and be moved by his reasons for staying in bed. However foolish it would be for him to do so, staying in bed while considering the reasons for doing so remains within his discretion. So even if there is an exclusionary reason for B in this case, it is not the kind required to partially constitute a preemptive reason of the sort that genuinely authoritative directives create.

Suppose now that after a while the authority alarm is no longer effective for B. He no longer has a sufficiently vivid "authority experience" when it wakes him. "Oh, you're only a recorded voice," he begins to think. And he begins to talk back to the clock, saying things like "There you go again. I'm going to stay in bed. What are you going to do about it?" Being somewhat unsophisticated, the device is unable to give B a sufficiently vivid experience of being held to account. It simply continues with its recorded message: "If you don't get out of bed, you will be found in violation and made subject to the full authority of the state."

[^22]: I am indebted here to Scott Hershovitz and David Enoch. 
[^23]: See Raz 1990: 48. I am indebted here to Scott Shapiro. 
[^24]: And so, as I would analyze it, about the second-personal character of authority-based exclusionary reasons.

Finally, B, who really does need to get out of bed reliably at 7 a.m., is at his wits' end. In desperation, he hires an actual person to play the role of a legitimate authority. We can imagine that he hires the very person (call him A) who played the role of the authoritative experimenter in the Milgram experiment. Assume, moreover, that before he issues his directives to B, A deliberatively rehearses the reasons for and against directing B to get out of bed; as it happens A is both wise and concerned for B's welfare. This finally gives B a permanent fix to his problem; it provides B precisely the "authority experience" he needs to get him reliably out of bed at 7 a.m. When B is tempted to continue lying in bed, A speaks to B in an authoritative voice, "reminds" him of his (A's) (putative) authority and that B may not even think about remaining in bed in a sufficiently persuasive way that B "obeys."

Here again, it seems obvious that although B has reason to treat A as an authority and A's directives as giving him preemptive reasons, since this is the only way he will be able to get out of bed at 7 a.m., as he has most reason to do, A does not actually have any genuine authority over B, and A's directives do not actually create preemptive reasons. B continues to have the same weighty reasons for getting out of bed at 7 a.m., and so for responding to the directives, and the same less weighty reasons for continuing to lie in bed. Granted, he has pragmatic reasons for following A's directives (maybe even weightier reasons than he did for responding to the alarm, since, if this does not work, maybe nothing will). And so perhaps he has even weightier pragmatic reasons not even to think about the reasons in favor of continuing to lie in bed. But however weighty these pragmatic reasons might be, they do not constitute or create preemptive reasons or authority-based exclusionary reasons. Even if he would be an idiot to think for a moment of the reasons for staying in bed, it is in no way illegitimate or beyond his discretion to do so, and we have no inclination to say, as we do in the case of genuine preemptive reasons, that the reasons for remaining in bed are not just overridden, but are rather preempted or displaced.

I built into the case that A wisely considers the reasons for directing B to get out of bed in order to mirror Raz's thought that genuine practical authorities exclude reasons when they take account of them in deciding to issue directives that conflict with actions the excluded actions recommend.[^25] But how exactly is the fact that an authority takes account of the reasons for and against the actions they prescribe supposed to be relevant to establishing practical authority (including the capacity to create preemptive reasons) according the NJT? The fact that genuine authorities have the standing to consider reasons in this way and issue directives that preclude those who are subject to their authority from legitimately taking account of the reasons in favor of actions that violate their directives is a consequence of their authority and nothing therefore that can be relevant to establishing it. Of course, one way in which the fact that a putative authority takes good account of reasons in deciding what to prescribe can be relevant to his actually having authority of one kind is in establishing his epistemic authority. But epistemic authority is not practical authority; it involves no standing to create exclusionary reasons. The most it licenses is counsel, not command.

[^25]: It might be objected that Raz intends the Normal Justification Thesis only to concern the justification of claims to authority made by those who already have de facto authority; in other words, as what can turn de facto authority into de jure authority. We can easily modify the case, however, to deal with this. Suppose that A is someone with de facto authority, a policeman, say, and that the police claim the authority to enter citizens' homes and wake them up by issuing orders. Suppose that B does not, as a matter of conviction, accept the validity of these claims. Nonetheless, B needs a reliable way of getting up, and he knows that he will treat A's claims as legitimate and comply with them in his sleepy state, so B asks A to come to his house and issue orders daily at the appointed hour. It is hard to see why any of this should give B any reason to believe that A has de jure authority as a matter of actual fact. I am indebted to Candice Delmas for this objection and for discussion of it.

Consider a case that Raz discusses in a recent paper. Raz notes that we "can best avoid endangering [ourselves] and others by conforming to the law regarding the dispensation and use of pharmaceutical products." In doing so we "rely on the experts whose advice [the law] reflects to know what is dangerous in these matters better than [we] can judge for [ourselves]" (Raz 2006: 114–15). The only kind of authority the experts have, however, is epistemic authority. Assume that they know better than we what we must do in order to comply with reasons in the area of their expertise. So far, the only authority they have is to issue advice—to tell us what we should or have reason to do, not to tell us to doit. Expertise alone gives them no standing to issue authoritative directives that create preemptive reasons. When we have heard their advice, we may, of course, have pragmatic reasons not just to follow it, but also not to deliberate further or even to consider reasons for acting contrary to it. But however inadvisable it might be for us to consider these latter reasons, that would not make it illegitimate or outside of our area of discretion. And it wouldn't preempt or displace the reasons.

So far as the NJT is concerned, the only work that can be done by the fact that a putative authority knows the relevant reasons for acting better than we do is to make it likelier that our treating putative directives based on that expertise as genuinely (practically) authoritative will lead us to comply better with these reasons. Raz's position is not that epistemic authority is transformed into practical authority when we would do better in complying with reasons that would apply to us if we were to accept experts' epistemic authority and follow their advice. What the NJT says is that someone acquires practical authority over us when we would do better in complying with reasons if we were to accept her "directives as authoritatively binding." It is the consequences of treating someone as having genuine practical authority that are relevant, not the consequences of seeing her as knowing better than we do what reasons for acting we have. Whether the directives are based on expertise or not has no apparent intrinsic relevance, although of course it can be extrinsically relevant in the way I described.[^26]

[^26]: Raz might, of course, modify the NJT to require that the putative authority's directive be based on expertise, and/or that it be believed by those putatively subject to it to be based on expertise as a separate condition. But this would raise the question of the relation of this new condition to the (unmodified) NJT, since it would seem to have a substantially different rationale from the NJT as Raz has proposed it.

It seems, therefore, that the most we can say when the conditions of the NJT are satisfied, is that an "alleged subject" has reason to treat the alleged authority as having genuine practical authority, and hence to regard her directives as creating preemptive reasons. As we have seen, it simply does not follow from the fact that we have reason to treat someone's directives as creating preemptive reasons that they actually do create such reasons. Even if II follows from I (in the cases considered above concerning A and B), III does not follow from II.

There being reason to treat someone as having the authority to create preemptive reasons in the fact that one will comply better with reasons in general is not therefore sufficient to make it the case that he actually has that authority. Now, as I have said, I believe that authority is conceptually tied to accountability. In my view, indeed, the capacity to create preemptive reasons is itself inextricably bound up with accountability. Once an authority sets a speed limit, it is no longer within my discretion to decide for myself whether considerations that would otherwise speak in favor of driving faster are good enough reasons for me to do so, overriding whatever reasons the law might create. I may no longer legitimately take these into account. It seems to me, however, that the reason I may not is because obeying legitimate authority is something I am answerable for doing. In this matter, I no longer simply answer to myself. I answer to the authority and, as I see it, to other representative persons or members of the moral community to whom I am accountable for complying with moral obligations.

So far, I have deliberately constructed examples where the reasons in play concern nothing we are normally answerable for doing, for example, complying with prudential reasons. And I have argued that the fact that treating someone as an authority would enable one to comply better with these reasons cannot establish that he actually has the authority one would thereby take him to have. It cannot establish that his directives create preemptive reasons. If one is not answerable for providing for one's retirement or for getting out of bed at 7 a.m., then, even if one would do better at accomplishing these (and so complying with the relevant reasons) were one to treat oneself as answerable to some authority and so treat his directives as creating preemptive reasons, one does not thereby actually become answerable to him, and his directives do not thereby create preemptive reasons.

But what if the reasons themselves concern moral obligations, which, if I am right, are things we are answerable (to one another as representative persons or members of the moral community) for doing? If we restrict the NJT to reasons that already entail answerability in some form, will it serve to justify differential practical authority claims of the sort Raz is concerned with, e.g., of someone A over someone else, B, along with A's capacity to create preemptive reasons for B? I do not think so.

Suppose that the reason why B needs to get out of bed at 7 a.m. is that if he does not he will be unable to comply with an important obligation, say, a promise he has made to C. And suppose that the only way B can reliably get out of bed at 7 a.m. is to treat A as a legitimate authority in the way we earlier imagined. Does this create some special accountability of B to A? Does it make it the case that A has the capacity to create preemptive reasons for B? Now, as I analyze things, in having promised to C, and thereby given C a right and created an obligation to C, B has become answerable to C in a special way as a right holder.[^27] Only C is in a position to release B from his promise, to receive an apology or compensation should B not keep his promise, and so on. However, in being morally obligated period, B is not distinctively answerable to C; he is accountable to the moral community and, in principle, therefore, to anyone as a representative of the moral community, including A, C, and B himself.

Notice now that none of this involves any special accountability of B to A or A's having any special capacity to create preemptive reasons for B. B is no less answerable to A than to any other member of the moral community, but neither is he any more. We might agree that if the only way B can keep his promise to C is to treat A as having authority over him and regarding himself as answerable to A, then he is, as we might then put it, answerable for answering to A. He would not, however, be especially answerable to A for answering to A. Any special or individual answerability would seem to be to C. Under these conditions, he would be answerable to C, especially, for answering to A, as the only means for complying with his obligation to C. B would also be answerable to the moral community, and hence, inter alia to A, for answering to A. But this is not the same kind of accountability to A that would be involved in A's having authority over B.

Neither, it seems, would A thereby acquire any capacity to create preemptive reasons. We should agree with Raz that mandatory moral norms create preemptive reasons, and therefore, that if it would be wrong for B not to get out of bed at 7 a.m., that B has an exclusionary reason not to consider or act on any reasons he might otherwise have to stay in bed (Raz 1990: 61). If it is wrong for him to stay in bed, then it is no longer legitimate for B to consider staying in bed for the reasons that would otherwise recommend his doing so; this is no longer within his discretion. Similarly, if C were to object to B's remaining in bed, then C's legitimate demand owing to the right given him by B's promise would create a preemptive or authority-based exclusionary reason for B. But none of this gives A any distinctive authority to create preemptive reasons for B that other members of the moral community do not have.

As I see it, what explains the capacity of mandatory moral norms to create (authoritybased) exclusionary reasons is that they are tied to accountability in the way I have proposed. It is because we are answerable to one another for not violating moral obligations that it is not within our discretion to deliberate on the basis of reasons that would otherwise recommend actions that, as things actually stand, amount to moral wrong. Here we answer not just to ourselves but also to one another and, indeed, ourselves, as representatives of the moral community. But if that is right, then the capacity to create exclusionary reasons cannot characterize a concept of authority that is an alternativeto authority as involving accountability. Rather the capacity to create exclusionary reasons would itself derive from an accountability relation that is itself essential to practical authority.

[^27]: I discuss promising as a second-personal relation in Darwall 2011b.

But if the NJT fails therefore both for authority as accountability and, consequently, for authority as the capacity to create preemptive reasons, what then can justify differential authority relations, as in legal and political authority? The lesson to draw from the failure of the NJT, I believe, is that the only justification that can succeed is one that proceeds from within the second-person standpoint, beginning with the assumption that we all share a common basic authority to make claims and demands of one another at all, and proceeding from there to consider what differential claims to authority anyone could sensibly accept, or no one could reasonably reject on that basis. The basic premise underlying any successful justification of differential authority, in other words, is that we share a common basic authority to make claims of each other just by virtue of being persons. Or, as Rawls put the point, to be a person is to be a "self-originating source of valid claims" (Rawls 1980: 546).[^28]

[^28]: I am indebted to audiences at the Analytical Legal Philosophy conference at Yale University in April, 2008 and a conference on the philosophy of Joseph Raz, held at the University of Manchester in May, 2008, for comments and discussion and to two anonymous referees for Ethics.
