# 6. Internalism and Externalism about Reasons 

*Hille Paakkunainen*

### **Abstract and Keywords**

Internalism about normative reasons for action, in its broadest characterization, holds that each agent A's reasons to act are constrained by some motivational fact, M, about A. Different versions of internalism differ on what M is. This chapter examines Bernard Williams's (1981) influential version of, and argument for, internalism, in a broadly sympathetic vein. I isolate the key assumptions driving Williams's argument, tracing their influence on Williams's views and on the literature he sparked; and arguing that each assumption, when properly understood, is more plausible than some recent critics think. The upshot is that Williams's internalism, and the assumptions that generate it, remain serious contenders on the contemporary scene.

Keywords: internalism, externalism, reasons for action, Williams, reasons and motivation, deliberative constraint

## **6.1 Reasons and Motives**

"You have every reason to go see him right now." "There are so many more reasons against it than for it. Still, I'm going to do it. Caution to the wind!" Such statements should look familiar. They employ the concept of a *normative reason* for (or against) action. Normative reasons for an agent A to do something, Φ, are considerations that justify, recommend or call for A's Φ-ing, at least *pro tanto*. Normative reasons are often contrasted with *motivating* reasons: the reasons for which an agent acts, and that thereby explain the agent's doing what she does. The reasons for which A Φs needn't also be normative reasons for A to Φ. Axl's motivating reason to visit Bea might be that his visit would aggravate Bea. Perhaps this is Axl's motivating reason because Axl enjoys aggravating Bea, and tends to seek out every opportunity to do so.[^1] But this motivating reason might do nothing to justify the visit. (On the general contrast between motivating and normative reasons, see McNaughton and Rawling, Chapter 7 this volume. On the **(p. 144)** metaphysics of motivating reasons, and on different ways of using the term, see Wiland, Chapter 8 this volume.)[^2]

Normative and motivating reasons thus seem to come apart, both extensionally and intensionally. Nonetheless, a highly influential line of thought sees them as necessarily connected. Bernard Williams, whose 1979 article "Internal and External Reasons" (reprinted 1981) launched a vast contemporary literature on "internalism" and "externalism" about normative reasons for action, states the alleged necessary connection as follows:

> It must be a mistake simply to separate explanatory and normative reasons. If it is true that A has a [normative] reason to Φ, then it must be possible that he should Φ for that reason; and if he does act for that reason, then that reason will be the explanation of his acting. [ . . . ] This is a basic connection. (1995a: 38–9)

Williams's "explanatory" reasons are motivating reasons: reasons for which A Φs.[^3] Williams claims that whenever a consideration, *p*, is a normative reason for A to Φ, it must be "possible" for *p* to also be A's motivating reason to Φ. Let's use "A Φs because *p*" to indicate that A Φs for the motivating reason that *p*. We can formulate Williams's "basic connection" as the following Explanatory Constraint, EC:

> EC: The fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A can Φ because *p*.

EC calls for clarification. What is the modality of "can"? And what does it take for it to be the case that A can Φ because *p,* in the relevant sense of "can"? In order for A to Φ because *p*, A must at least believe that *p*; but what more is required? I clarify these issues in section 6.3. But abstract away from them for now. Williams sees EC as a "fundamental motivation" for what he calls "internalism" about normative reasons for action (1995a: 38–9). The following seems to be Williams's considered formulation of internalism, and of its negation, externalism:

> The internalist view of [normative] reasons for action is that [ . . . ] A has a reason to Φ only if he could reach the conclusion to Φ by a sound deliberative route from the motivations he already has [that is, from his actual present subjective motivational set, S]. The externalist view is that this is not a necessary condition, and that it can be true of A that he has a [normative] reason to Φ even though A has no motivation in his [S] that could, either directly or by some extension through sound deliberation, lead him to Φ. (1995a: 35)[^4]

**(p. 145)** Williams claims that internalism, thus understood, would explain or accommodate EC, whereas it's not clear how externalism could (1995: 39–40, 1981: 106–9). There is controversy over exactly how Williams's argument from EC to internalism goes, over whether it's Williams's only or best argument, as well as over how to interpret Williams's internalism itself.[^5] Further, the literature since Williams's "Internal and External Reasons" has spawned a variety of different versions of internalism and externalism. Some externalists reject EC, thus also rejecting the explanatory task that Williams claims both internalists and externalists face (e.g. McDowell 1995, Parfit 2011). Relatedly, some view EC, or something very close to it, as itself the heart of internalism (Setiya 2012: 4). On the other hand, even some contemporary views billed as "internalist" reject EC, while holding that an agent's normative reasons nonetheless depend on her existing motivations in some way (Markovits 2011a, 2011b, 2014; cf. Smith 1995). The territory is further complicated by the fact that some philosophers view (their favored version of) internalism as a conceptual truth, implicit in the very concept of a normative reason for action (Williams 1981, 1995a; cf. Finlay 2009 on Williams); some as a metaphysical truth about the nature of the property of being a reason for action, a truth not entailed by the concept of a reason (Markovits 2014); and yet others as a first-order normative claim about what reasons there are or could be (Street 2017).[^6]

Amidst this complexity of views, two things are now widely agreed upon. First, that EC itself is badly in need of defense, and can hardly stand as the "basic connection" that Williams thought it was. And second, that uniting all views about reasons that anyone has termed "internalist" is the thought that a necessary condition of *p*'s being a normative reason for A to Φ is that *some motivational fact about A* obtains (Finlay and Schroeder 2008/2012: §1.1).[^7] Only some such views are committed to EC—although of course, EC itself counts as a version of internalism on this broad classification. The broad uniting thesis that A's reasons depend on some motivational fact about A also leaves open stronger views, on which the relevant motivational fact is necessary *and sufficient* for there being a reason for A to Φ, or is what there being a reason for A to Φ *consists* in or is *grounded* in. Views of these stronger types are sometimes called "subjectivism" (see e.g. Sobel 2011, 2001; Parfit 2011: i, ch. 3).[^8] As is most common, I'll take the claim of necessary connection to be the heart of internalism.

**(p. 146)** Of course, the uniting thesis that A's reasons depend on some motivational fact about A is highly schematic, and very permissive as it stands. Limiting versions of it are trivially true. For example: *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if, were A to Φ because *p*, A would thereby act on a normative reason. Still, the uniting thesis captures, in the most general form, a view that admits of multiple different versions, some trivial and uninteresting, some obviously false, and—so internalists claim—some that are both non-trivial and true.[^9]

Much of the literature on internalism can be read as an attempt to find the right connection between agents' reasons and their motivational profiles, with different versions of internalism construing the connection in different ways, and corresponding versions of externalism denying the claimed connections. In the space available here, I cannot hope to do justice to all the different views on which reasons depend on agents' motivations, let alone to all the different views on which they don't. This would be to attempt to address all the views about reasons that there are. Instead, I'll mostly focus on assessing the merits of views that accept EC—including the merits of EC itself—in light of the literature that Williams's article sparked. While this is my focus, examining the merits of views that accept EC should of course also inform assessment of views that reject EC.

Section 6.2 starts by explaining what's at stake with debates over internalism. Section 6.3 clarifies EC and Williams's internalism, and examines arguments from the former to the latter. The discussion identifies a broad premise in the background of both Williams's view and the views of many (though not all) of his opponents. This premise is the *Deliberative Constraint* that, roughly, normative reasons for action are premises in good practical deliberation, where such deliberation concludes in acting on one's (weightiest) reasons, in the way that those reasons support.[^10] Although one can accept this Constraint without accepting EC, I'll argue that the most plausible versions of internalism that accept EC must also accept the Deliberative Constraint—though with perhaps surprising consequences. Section 6.4 then investigates the merits of EC and the Deliberative Constraint. Each has seemed obvious to some and been attacked by others. I tentatively defend both against objections by Julia Markovits (2011a, 2014), David Sobel (2001), and Michael Smith (1995, 2009). I suggest that a deep source of the attraction of each thesis is the peculiar normativity of normative reasons: the fact that, when A has decisive reasons to Φ, A ought to Φ, in a sense that places a genuine and authoritative demand on A. While my discussion here is tentative, I suspect it reveals something importantly right about internalism.

## **(p. 147) 6.2 The Stakes**

Why worry about whether internalism is true? One set of concerns is extensional. On some versions of internalism, an agent's reasons for action depend on contingent features of her actual or possible motivational profile.[^11] For example, on Williams's internalism, the fact that a neighbor needs my help lifting a tree that fell on her is a reason for me to lift the tree only if lifting the tree is something I could be moved to do by some element already in my "subjective motivational set" S, either directly or indirectly through some extension via "sound deliberation." And according to Williams, this condition might fail to obtain if the contents of my S are sufficiently nasty (1981: 105). (More about this in 6.3.) Given my nastiness, the fact that my neighbor needs my help might be no reason for me to help. This consequence seems counterintuitive. Why think that my nasty motivational profile makes it so that there's no reason for me to help, rather than that my nastiness makes me unresponsive to reasons that there really are?[^12] Examples can be multiplied. For instance, deeply imprudent persons might lack reasons to avoid future agony (Parfit 2011: i: 73–82; cf. Sobel 2011). The worry is that any version of internalism on which an agent's reasons depend on her contingent motivations risks extensional inadequacy.

More ambitious forms of internalism try to resist such counterintuitive extensional consequences by arguing that deeply immoral or amoral, or deeply imprudent, motivational profiles are impossible (Korsgaard 1986, 1996, 2009; cf. Smith 2010, 2015); or that no matter how immoral or imprudent one's motivational starting points, they somehow entail pro-moral or prudent motivations when corrected for in the light of full or relevant information and relatively modest and uncontroversial standards of "procedural rationality," standards requiring "internal consistency and coherence" among one's attitudes (Markovits 2014, 2011b; cf. Smith 1995).[^13] Such strategies attempt to locate some motivational fact that holds necessarily for all agents and secures even moral or prudential reasons' connection to each agent's motivational profile. However, such claims about necessary motivations are notoriously hard to defend. Some have accordingly suggested that internalists might do better to explain away the seeming counterintuitiveness of denying that certain reasons exist. Even if there are incorrigibly nasty agents who, because of their nastiness, lack certain reasons we wish they had, perhaps we can **(p. 148)** adequately criticize them and their actions in terms other than by appeal to alleged normative reasons (Manne 2014; cf. Williams 2001: 95–6). I return to this possibility briefly in the conclusion, in a skeptical vein.

These issues are very much live, and every attempt to index reasons to agents' motivations faces them in some form. It's worth noting that the potential counterintuitive extensional consequences of indexing reasons to agents' motivations don't depend on EC. Agents with deeply immoral or amoral motivational profiles might lack reasons to act morally well regardless of whether EC is true, if the motivational facts on which reasons supposedly depend are contingent—or, even if necessary, not necessarily pro-moral.[^14] Nonetheless, as I said, I'll mostly focus on versions of internalism, such as that of Williams, that accept EC.

Beyond concerns about extensional adequacy, another factor motivating interest in internalism is potential implications for broader debates about the nature of reasons. If A's reasons bear a necessary connection to some motivational fact about A, then any account of reasons must accommodate this fact. Moreover, unless the necessary connection is brute, there's some explanation for it; and a leading candidate explanation would be that the necessary connection obtains because of the nature of the property of being a reason for action. If what it is for *p* to be a reason for A to Φ just is for *p* to be a consideration that bears a suitable relation to A's motivational profile, then this would explain why A's reasons for action are necessarily connected to A's motivational profile. This could in turn provide an abductive argument for the relevant (reductive) view of what it is to be a reason—provided of course that alternative explanations are ruled out.[^15] For instance, suppose the necessary connection to be explained is EC. And suppose that agency is a capacity to act on any old consideration, normative reason or not. Then the nature of agency would explain why EC holds; no need to appeal to the nature of reasons. Such an explanation of EC by appeal to the nature of agency wouldn't constrain further theorizing about the nature of reasons.[^16]

With the stakes thus clarified, why hold that an agent's reasons depend on her motivational profile? And what are the contours of the relevant necessary connection?

## **(p. 149) 6.3 EC, Williams's Internalism, and the Deliberative Constraint**

Suppose Williams is right that EC constrains any further theorizing about reasons. How best to understand the constraint that EC places? And how might it support more fleshedout internalist theses such as that of Williams? Recall both EC and Williams's statement of his internalist view from section 6.1:

> EC: The fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A can Φ because *p*.

And Williams's statement of his internalism:

The internalist view of [normative] reasons for action is that [ . . . ] A has a reason to Φ only if he could reach the conclusion to Φ by a sound deliberative route from the motivations he already has [that is, from his actual present subjective motivational set, S]. The externalist view is that this is not a necessary condition, and that it can be true of A that he has a reason to Φ even though A has no motivation in his [S] that could, either directly or by some extension through sound deliberation, lead him to Φ. (1995a: 35)

Like EC, Williams's internalism speaks to the necessary, not sufficient, conditions of an agent's having a reason to Φ (1995a: 35–6, 2001: 91–2).[^17] And while Williams speaks generally of A's having a reason to Φ, rather than of a specific consideration *p*'s status as a reason, it's clear that the more specific question is Williams's ultimate concern (1981: 107). It's only because a specific consideration *p* is a reason for A to Φ that A "has a reason to Φ."[^18] Connectedly, recall Williams's claim that his internalism can explain EC, while externalism can't (1995a: 39–40, 1981: 106–9). Like EC, Williams's internalism had thus better be concerned not with A's being led to Φ for *any* old motivating reason, or for no reason at all, but in particular with A's being led to Φ on the basis of the consideration, *p*, that is also the normative reason in question.[^19] Finally, by "sound deliberation" starting from the agent's S, Williams seems to mean broadly instrumental deliberation that successfully seeks either causal or constitutive means to the co-satisfaction of the agent's contingent ends—including, for example, ways to carry out personal projects or to express commitments. Williams makes it clear, however, that he takes there to be "essential indeterminacy" in what counts as a "rational deliberative process"; and that his central claim **(p. 150)** about deliberation is just that its course is "controlled" by existing contingent elements in the agent's S (1981: 104–5, 110; 1995a: 36–8). We can formulate Williams's Internalism, W-INT, as follows:

> W-INT: The fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A has some contingent motivation in her present actual subjective motivational set, S, that could lead A to Φ because *p via* broadly instrumental sound deliberation.

Three clarifications are in order at this stage. First, to successfully seek means to one's ends, one had better not rely on false beliefs in the course of one's deliberation. In Williams's example, an otherwise instrumentally rational agent deliberates unsoundly if his desire for a gin and tonic leads him to drink petrol because of a false belief about what's in the glass (1981: 102). (Such deliberation might be "valid," as we might put it; but because at least one of its factual premises is false, it's unsound.) Still, Williams is adamant that soundness in deliberation doesn't require correction of one's moral, prudential, or other normative or evaluative commitments (1995a: 36–7). Williamsian deliberation is sound if and only if its ordinary descriptive premises are true and it is (broadly) instrumentally cogent. It's because no more than these materials go into making deliberation sound on Williams's view that sufficiently nasty starting motivational sets can imply that agents lack reasons to be moral.

Second, while the "internalist view," as Williams states it in the quote above, formulates the necessary condition on A's reasons as "[A] could reach the conclusion to Φ by a sound deliberative route from the motivations he already has," the contrasting "externalist view" as stated denies what seems to be a more expansive disjunctive condition: that A has a motivation in his S that "could, either directly or by some extension through sound deliberation, lead him to Φ." Should we incorporate this more expansive condition into W-INT? Much of the literature on Williams's internalism omits mention of the disjunction, focusing only on what sound deliberation might lead one to do.[^20] We can justify this tendency by thinking of being led "directly" to Φ by some motivation in one's S as a limiting case of "deliberation" from S. When one "directly" carries out an element in one's S—for instance, one Φs as a result of a desire to Φ (1981: 104)—this is a limiting case of finding a "constitutive" solution: of finding that *this* would constitute Φ-ing. I doubt that this unduly distorts Williams's view; at any rate, Williams himself makes no hay about the disjunction. We can stick to the above formulation of W-INT.

The third clarification concerns the idea that sound deliberation concludes in A's Φ-ing on her normative reasons—in A's actually doing what *p* is a reason for her to do. Normative reasons are often *pro tanto*: they can be overweighed by other, contrary reasons for other, different actions. Surely sound deliberation wouldn't lead one to act on *all* of one's conflicting reasons in a situation, in the (conflicting) ways that they support. Partly because of this, Williams's view is often stated in terms of sound **(p. 151)** deliberation from one's S engendering a *motivation* to Φ, instead of leading one to Φ outright (see e.g. Manne 2014: 90, Markovits 2014: 27–30, Setiya 2012: 4). Indeed, Williams himself sometimes speaks in these terms (1981: 108–10). However, it also seems strange to expect sound deliberation to issue in multiple conflicting motivations whenever one has reasons for conflicting actions. It may be better to think of sound deliberation as registering one's reasons for conflicting actions in some other way, and as leading one to act on the reasons that are *decisive*. We needn't settle the details here. For the purposes of figuring out why we should think that anything like Williams's view is correct, we can adopt the simplifying assumption, which Williams himself sometimes adopts, that what's at issue in W-INT and EC are decisive reasons (Williams 2001: 90).[^21] So again, let's stick to the formulations above.

How, then, might we argue from EC to W-INT? Whether and how EC might support more fleshed-out versions of internalism such as Williams's depends in part on how we read the "can" in EC. We can distinguish between readings on which the "can" signals bare possibility (whether metaphysical or conceptual), and readings on which it attributes a present actual capacity to A. I start with the first, and go on to explain what I mean by the second as we go along.

Understood as making a bare possibility claim, the consequent of EC says that there's a possible world in which A Φs because *p*. As David Sobel (2001: 222–3) points out, this consequent can be made true by, say, the possibility of a far-fetched brain surgery that instills in A a (perhaps temporary) disposition to Φ because *p*, regardless of what A's actual S is like. If such brain surgery worlds must be possible regardless of how we vary "A," "*p*," and "Φ"—at least within the constraints of intelligibility—then this would suffice to make EC true, if the "can" in EC signals bare possibility.

However, it's difficult to see how EC read this way might support Williams's internalism. Clearly EC can't on its own furnish a good deductive argument for W-INT. Single-premise deductive arguments are always either invalid or, even if sound, objectionably questionbegging.[^22] We could try adding further premises—and not just further premises that together amount to an independent argument for W-INT, but premises that still allow EC to do substantive work in the argument. The most common interpretation of Williams reads him as giving something like the following argument—call it the "Classic Argument":

> **(1)** The fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A can Φ because *p*. (EC) **(2)** A can Φ because *p* only if A has some contingent motivation in her present actual S that could lead A to Φ because *p* via broadly instrumental sound deliberation. (roughly Humean Theory of Motivation)

> **(p. 152) (3)** So, the fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A has some contingent motivation in her present actual S that could lead A to Φ because *p* via broadly instrumental sound deliberation. (W-INT)

The theory of motivation stated in (2) is roughly Humean in the sense that it indexes the possibility of A's being moved to Φ to contingent motivations that A already has. In order for *p* to become A's motivating reason to Φ, *p* had better show Φ-ing to somehow engage a contingent motivational tendency that A already has. The theory is only "roughly" Humean, however, partly because of Williams's noted liberality concerning deliberation. Williams is likewise notably permissive about what A's "motivational set" S might include. In addition to pro-attitudes such as desires, it can include such things as "dispositions of evaluation, patterns of emotional reaction, personal loyalties, and various projects" (1981: 105). Williams even admits that *beliefs* to the effect that *p* is a reason for one to Φ might motivate one to Φ; it's just that, in order for such beliefs to motivate, one must already have a disposition to be moved by them (1981: 107).[^23] Read in these broad terms, there's some basis for attributing something like (2) to Williams, and for finding something like (2) plausible.

However, if the "can" in (1) is the "can" of bare possibility—so that the consequent of (1) says just that there's a possible world in which A Φs for the reason that *p*—then we must read the "can" in the antecedent of (2) in the same way, on pain of equivocating.[^24] And on this reading, (2) is simply false. For as we just noted, *regardless* of what's in A's actual S, there are possible brain surgery worlds in which A Φs for the reason that *p*. The bare possibility of A's Φ-ing for the reason that *p* after such far-fetched surgery is precisely *not* constrained by what's in A's actual S—unlike the contours of Williamsian "sound deliberation." Since (2) is false on the bare possibility reading of its antecedent, a charitable reading has to construe (2) in some other way. But (2) couldn't then help to mount a deductive argument to W-INT from EC, when EC is read in terms of the "can" of bare possibility. Indeed, it's hard to see what other premise could.

I return to the Classic Argument below, in considering other ways to interpret its premises. But recalling Williams's claim that internalism can *explain* EC while externalism can't (1995: 39–40; 1981: 106–9), we might read Williams as giving an *abductive* argument from EC to W-INT. Even if we read the "can" in EC as the "can" of bare possibility, W-INT is surely enough to at least entail EC. The trouble is, of course, that other views of reasons besides W-INT entail EC read this way too. For instance, the following view does:

> VIRTUE AND REASONS: The fact that *p* is a reason for A to Φ (if and) only if, if A were fully virtuous, A would be moved to Φ because *p*. [^25]

**(p. 153)** Provided that A's being or becoming fully virtuous isn't outside the realm of bare possibility—and it's hard to see why it would be—then VIRTUE AND REASONS entails the EC of bare possibility too. Williams is clear that he wants to rule out views such as VIRTUE AND REASONS, in favor of W-INT. I return to this in 6.4. The present point is just that, since both VIRTUE AND REASONS and W-INT entail the EC of bare possibility, an abductive argument from EC read this way to W-INT won't work. If there's something to speak in favor of W-INT over other views such as VIRTUE AND REASONS, it must be something else.[^26]

What alternative readings of EC are there, and do they fare better in supporting W-INT? An obvious possibility, noted by, for example, Sobel (2001: 223) and Finlay and Schroeder (2008/2012: §2.1.1), is to read the consequent of EC in stronger terms. Specifically, perhaps "can" in EC restricts the worlds in which A Φs because *p* to those worlds in which A is led to Φ because *p* through sound deliberation starting from an S just like her actual present S. But of course, as Finlay and Schroeder as well as Sobel point out, EC read this way would merely presuppose W-INT, or something close to it.

However, there's a further—and once we see it, a more plausible and natural—interpretation of EC as attributing to agents an actual present *capacity* to act on their normative reasons.[^27] As I'll explain, EC read this way doesn't presuppose W-INT, yet contributes to a fairly clear and promising, if still controversial, rationale for W-INT. And arguably this is how much of the literature immediately following Williams's "Internal and External Reasons" interprets EC, though usually without commenting on the contrast between this reading and the bare possibility reading above.

To see the difference between capacity claims and bare possibility claims, consider attributions of actual present capacity to swim, in the sense of a standing ability to swim. Such standing abilities are usually at issue when we say "I can swim" or "I can't swim." To have a capacity to swim in this sense, it's not enough that there's some faraway possible world in which I swim. Of course, neither do I need to be actually swimming. Even if I know how to swim and I'm in a swimmable body of water, I might fail to exercise my capacity to swim—perhaps willingly, or because of a cramp. (If a cramp prevents me from swimming, there's a sense in which I'm incapacitated, and "can't" swim, although I still have the general standing ability to swim.) What does seem true is this: if I have the actual present capacity to swim, there's a whole *range* of possible worlds, relatively close to the actual world, such that if I'm in swimmable bodies of water, and I sincerely try to swim, then I swim. This leaves open that there's a difference in the rafts of subjunctives entailed by the capacity of someone who only barely knows how to swim and by the capacity of a highly skilled swimmer. It's also left open how to analyze capacities— **(p. 154)** whether, for instance, capacities are analyzable in terms of the rafts of subjunctives they entail, or whether there's some further fact about one that explains why the relevant subjunctives hold when one has a given capacity.[^28] Either way, if I have an actual present capacity, then *I'm now such that* the relevant raft of subjunctives is true of me; it's a further question what exactly my being like this consists in.[^29]

These observations about capacities seem general. If they're correct, then likewise if A has the actual present capacity to Φ because *p*, then there's a range of relatively nearby worlds in which A Φs because *p*. Capacity claims entail a significant degree of subjunctive robustness. This again leaves open exactly how to analyze A's capacity to Φ because *p*; and exactly how to fill in the conditions in which A exercises or is likely to exercise that capacity. It's a motivational capacity, and its analysis is a task for theories of motivation. This suggests a way to read the Classic Argument in terms of motivational capacities and their analysis:

> **(1C)** The fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A has the actual present capacity to Φ because *p*. (EC, capacity version)

> **(2C)** A has the actual present capacity to Φ because *p* only if A has some contingent motivation in her present actual S that could lead A to Φ because *p* via broadly instrumental sound deliberation. (roughly Humean Theory of Motivation, capacity version)

> **(3C)** So, the fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A has some contingent motivation in her present actual S that could lead A to Φ because *p* via broadly instrumental sound deliberation. (W-INT)

The consequent of (1C) presupposes no particular view about what having the relevant motivational capacity consists in or requires. (2C) states a theory of what A has to be like in order for the capacity attribution to be true of her. There's no equivocation here, and no question-begging—though of course there's room to resist either premise.

I discuss the plausibility of (1C) in section 6.4. For now, note that (2C) at least makes much more sense than the bare possibility version of the premise did. Theories of motivation are precisely theories of what it takes to have a motivational capacity to Φ—not merely (implausible) claims about what must be actually true of A now in order for there to be some faraway possible world in which A Φs. Moreover, recalling the liberality of Williams's views about deliberation and the contents of A's S, (2C) might start to look almost indisputable. Who would deny that what one has the present actual capacity to do depends on one's present actual dispositions and tendencies, broadly construed?[^30]

**(p. 155)** Something like this capacity reading of the Classic Argument is arguably how much of the critical literature immediately following Williams's "Internal and External Reasons" reads him—though usually without explicitly mentioning the contrast between this reading and the bare possibility reading above.[^31] Christine Korsgaard (1986) accepts (1C) but rejects (2C), disagreeing with Williams about agents' motivational capacities.[^32] She doubts that practical reasoning is limited to broadly means/ends reasoning; and perhaps more importantly, given Williams's liberality about "deliberation," urges that some dispositions in agents' S might be non-contingent, necessary for agents as such, contrary to what (2C) assumes. In contrast, John McDowell (1995) accepts Williams's broad view of motivational capacities but rejects (1C). McDowell accepts that there's a weaker sense in which agents "can" come to be motivated by their normative reasons, through a non-deliberative process such as "conversion" to seeing things aright. (Cf. Sobel's brain surgery example.) What he doubts is that any transition to being moved by one's reasons must be an exercise of one's present actual motivational capacities, whatever their precise shape. It can instead be a transition to having virtue—and this is a "transition *to* deliberating correctly," not a transition effected *by* deliberating correctly (1995: §5). McDowell's view is, roughly, VIRTUE AND REASONS; and because he doubts that everyone already has the motivational capacities to act on the reasons that a virtuous person deliberating correctly would act on, he doubts (1C).

These disputes revolve largely around the issue of what "correctness" or "soundness" in deliberation amounts to; and how it's related to agents' capacities for deliberation, or acting for reasons, just as such. McDowell's virtuous agent's "correct" deliberation evidently isn't just Williamsian sound instrumental deliberation, as it involves correction for motivational starting points in the direction of virtue.[^33] Similar remarks apply, *mutatis mutandis*, for how Korsgaard's views about deliberation contrast with those of Williams.[^34] But notice that these issues about correct or sound deliberation only have a point, in the context of debates about reasons, if we assume that agents' reasons are constrained by the contours of sound deliberation, whatever exactly these contours **(p. 156)** look like. This points to a hidden premise that McDowell, Williams, and Korsgaard all agree on:

> Deliberative Constraint: The fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ (in circumstance C) only if there's a sound deliberative route (in C) such that, if A underwent it, she would thereby be led to Φ because *p*. [^35]

What Williams, Korsgaard, and McDowell disagree on is *what sound deliberation of the sort that constrains A's reasons looks like*, and so how to interpret the Deliberative Constraint; and *whether A must be capable of going through the sound deliberative routes to which her reasons correspond*. McDowellian sound deliberation is something that non-virtuous agents don't have the present actual capacity to go through—they can at most transition in some non-deliberative way *to* deliberating soundly—but this doesn't deter Mc-Dowell from indexing reasons to such sound deliberation, since he rejects (1C). In contrast, since Williams and Korsgaard accept both (1C) and the Constraint, they're committed to holding that A must be actually capable of going through the sound deliberation to which her reasons correspond. Notice, relatedly, that in order for W-INT to *explain* EC in its capacity version, W-INT had better itself be read as attributing to A the actual present capacity to go through the sound deliberative routes to which A's reasons correspond.[^36] The upshot is a perhaps surprising form of optimism about agents' capacities to deliberate soundly, given that they have a range of reasons for action. Of course, Korsgaard's optimism goes deeper than Williams', since Korsgaard is also optimistic that sound deliberation never issues in immoral actions. Williams's optimism about agents' capacities for sound deliberation, and so for being moved by their reasons, is tempered by his pessimism about what the contours of sound deliberation and one's set of reasons can be like. Still, it's a good question what justifies the underlying optimism about agents' deliberative capacities.[^37]

One might try to avoid the optimism by holding onto (1C) but rejecting the Constraint. But plausible versions of internalism that buy into (1C) must also buy into something like the Constraint. For surely agents often have reasons to do things that go beyond what they are already "directly" motivated to do. For instance, surely agents can have reason to Ψ as a means to Φ-ing, if they desire to Φ but don't already desire to Ψ. If we hold onto (1C), then we must think that agents' capacities to be moved by their **(p. 157)** reasons extend to a capacity to engage in some kind of deliberation that is more complex than the limiting case of being moved to Φ as a constitutive solution to satisfying the desire to Φ. And since it's implausible that agents' normative reasons are indexed to what they would do after deliberating *badly*, [^38] or to the outcomes of deliberation just as such, it seems that anyone who holds (1C) should also hold a version of the Deliberative Constraint.

This makes urgent the evaluation of both EC and the Constraint. If there's good reason to reject the Constraint, this also puts pressure on us to reject EC. There might also be direct reasons to reject EC even if we accept some version of the Constraint, as McDowell does. Section 6.4 examines these issues. Before we proceed, three final remarks on Williams's argument and on nearby views.

First, the above observations yield a final revision to the Classic Argument for W-INT. One might have wondered at premise (2C)'s invocation of *sound* deliberation as part of a theory of agents' motivational capacities. The antecedent of (2C) and the consequent of (1C) concern A's motivating reasons. And it seems false that A has the capacity to act on a motivating reason, *p*, only if A could come to act on it through sound deliberation. Surely we often act on considerations after *unsound* deliberation—as when, in Williams's example, I'm led to drink a glass of petrol thanks to a false belief that the glass contains gin and tonic. Although my action is prompted in part by belief in a consideration, *p*, that is false, the action is still an exercise of my motivational capacity to act because *p*. If something in the vicinity of (2C) is true, it seems rather to be the following:

> **(2C*)** A has the actual present capacity to Φ because *p* only if A has some contingent motivation in her S that could lead A to Φ because *p* via broadly instrumental deliberation, whether sound or unsound. (roughly Humean Theory of Motivation, revised capacity version)

And of course, (2C*) and (1C) alone won't supply a good deductive argument for (3C). However, if the Deliberative Constraint holds, we can supply the further premise needed. While an agent's capacity to act on motivating reasons doesn't on its own entail that, in exercising that capacity, the agent deliberates soundly rather than unsoundly, *normative* reasons are indexed to sound, not unsound, deliberation, as per the Constraint. Accordingly, if agents must be capable of acting on their normative reasons (as per EC), they must be capable not just of unsound but also of sound deliberation. Our conclusion is the strong version of W-INT mentioned above:

> **(1C)** The fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A has the actual present capacity to Φ because *p*. (EC, capacity version)

> **(2C*)** A has the actual present capacity to Φ because *p* only if A has some contingent motivation in her present actual S that could lead A to Φ because *p* via broadly **(p. 158)** instrumental deliberation, whether sound or unsound. (roughly Humean Theory of Motivation, revised capacity version)

> **(2C**)** If *p* is not just A's motivating reason for Φ-ing but also a normative reason for A to Φ, then A's actual present capacity to Φ because *p* must be a capacity not just to deliberate from her S to Φ-ing because *p*, but to deliberate *soundly* from her S to Φing because *p*. This is because the Deliberative Constraint is true.

> **(3C*)** So, the fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A has some contingent motivation in her present actual S that could lead A to Φ because *p* via broadly instrumental sound deliberation *that A has the capacity to go through*. (W-INT, revised)

The second of our final remarks is that if we abstract away from Williams's views about sound deliberation and motivational capacities, we can formulate a parallel argument for a more general "Rational Capacity/Reasons Internalism," RC-INT, that Williams shares with Korsgaard as against McDowell:

> RC-INT: The fact that *p* is a normative reason for A to Φ only if A has the present actual capacity to deliberate soundly to the conclusion to Φ because *p*. [^39]

Third, there's a slightly different interpretation of Williams—one that sticks closer to the text of Williams's original (1979/1981) piece. On this interpretation, Williams's foremost concern is with the *meaning* of statements such as "*p* is a normative reason for A to Φ"; and W-INT is a view about their meaning. Williams is mystified as to what an alternative "external" interpretation of such statements could be, such that they might be true and explain EC. He considers the proposal that the content of external reason statements is that "if the agent rationally deliberated, then, *whatever motivations he originally had*, he would come to be motivated to Φ" (1981: 109, my emphasis). But as before, Williams can't see how rational deliberation—and so an exercise of an agent's motivational capacities—could lead an agent to Φ *except* by drawing in some way on the agent's existing motivations, broadly understood (p. 109). Thus external reasons statements understood in the proposed way are simply false, and couldn't explain EC (read as a capacity claim). And Williams can't see what *other* content external reason statements might have, if not the proposed content above. He asks, rhetorically: "*What* is it that one comes to believe when he comes to believe that there is reason for him to Φ, if it is not the proposition, or something that entails the proposition, that if he deliberated rationally, he would be motivated to act appropriately?" (1981: 109).

In the background here is, I think, a conviction that something like the Deliberative Constraint is a conceptual constraint on reasons. If EC (in the capacity version) is *also* a conceptual constraint on reasons, as Williams seems to think it is, then it's indeed hard **(p. 159)** to see what "external reason statements" could mean such that they could be true. For if we read "deliberation" and "A's S" as broadly as possible, then it's hard to deny that A's present capacity to Φ because *p* must draw on the dispositions and motives in her S, whether contingent or necessary.[^40] However, as, for example, Parfit (2011), Scanlon (2014), and Street (2017) point out, the meaning of statements such as "*p* is a normative reason for A to Φ," or the concept of a normative reason for action, might be primitive and unanalyzable. Indeed, this is nowadays a fairly common view. If it's right, then what A comes to believe when she comes to believe that *p* is a reason for her to Φ is just this: that *p* is a reason for her to Φ. The content of this belief might entail neither that A would Φ because *p* if she deliberated soundly, nor that A has the capacity to Φ because *p*. But this is fine *if* neither the Deliberative Constraint nor EC are conceptual truths; or, even if they are, they needn't be derived from the concept of a reason. The present interpretation of Williams thus can't escape the need to assess EC and the Deliberative Constraint. We can't simply assume that they constrain the very concept of a reason for action, any more than we can assume that they hold as metaphysical truths about reasons.

## **6.4 Why EC and the Deliberative Constraint?**

Start with the Deliberative Constraint. As we've seen, the Constraint can be interpreted compatibly with rejecting EC, and with accepting, say, VIRTUE AND REASONS, as Mc-Dowell does. For McDowell, sound deliberation is fully virtuous deliberation, the deliberation of the Aristotelian *phronimos* whose motivational profile is ethically good. Williams (1995b) objects, however, that less-than-virtuous people often have reasons to do things that are quite different from what fully virtuous people have reasons to do, and would do as a result of their fully virtuous deliberation. Our reasons can depend on our ethical imperfections. For Williams, this pushes us toward W-INT. But as we'll see, versions of Williams's complaint against McDowell can be raised against W-INT itself, and indeed against the very idea of the Deliberative Constraint.

Here is Williams against McDowell:

> [I]n considering what he has reason to do, one thing that A should take into account, if he is grown up and has some sense, are the ways in which he relevantly fails to be a *phronimos*. Aristotle's *phronimos* (to stay with that model) was, for instance, supposed to display temperance, a moderate equilibrium of the passions which did not even require the emergency semi-virtue of self-control. But, if I know that I fall short of temperance and am unreliable with respect even to some kinds of **(p. 160)** self-control, I shall have good reason not to do some things that a temperate person could properly and safely do. The homiletic tradition, not only within Christianity, is full of sensible warnings against moral weight-lifting. (Williams 1995b, quoted from the 2012 reprint, p. 92)

The intemperate and un-self-controlled A may have good reason to avoid putting herself in the way of temptation; and this is a reason that a virtuous person wouldn't have, and wouldn't be moved by via virtuous deliberation, as her virtue would preclude her being too tempted. The Constraint as interpreted through the lens of VIRTUE AND REASONS appears extensionally inadequate because our reasons can depend on our ethical imperfections. And Williams points out that it won't help to try to build A's ethical imperfections into a statement of her circumstances, so that *p* is a reason for A to Φ in circumstance C *where C includes A's lack of virtue*—only if, if A were deliberating fully virtuously in C, she would Φ because *p*. For this move would commit the "conditional fallacy": the proposed necessary condition on reasons would put the fully virtuous person into circumstances that she couldn't be in—the circumstances of lacking virtue—compatibly with her supposed virtue.[^41] Williams concludes that we had better interpret the Constraint, not through the lens of VIRTUE AND REASONS, but instead in a way more closely aligned with the actual motivational set, warts and all, of the A whose reasons we're interested in. And this pushes us toward W-INT (or RC-INT).

However, as, for example, Sobel (2001) and Johnson (1999) note, a similar "conditional fallacy" complaint arises against Williams, and indeed seemingly against any interpretation of the Deliberative Constraint. After all, both index A's reasons to what A would do through an idealized deliberative procedure. For Williams, the idealization involves not full ethical virtue, but rather broadly instrumental rationality and the removal of false beliefs regarding ordinary matters of fact—at least, matters of fact relevant to what one should do in the situation. The worry is that A can have reasons to try to remove such false beliefs, and reasons to try to become more instrumentally rational; yet if A satisfied the right-hand side of W-INT, and so deliberated instrumentally soundly, she *wouldn't* be motivated to become more instrumentally rational or to remove relevant false beliefs. For she would *already* be perfectly instrumentally rational, and wouldn't have false beliefs infecting her deliberations. *Mutatis mutandis* for the Deliberative Constraint, whatever we mean by "sound deliberation." Whatever the idealization involved in satisfying the strictures of "soundness," it seems that actual A might have reasons to try to become such as to satisfy those strictures; and these are reasons that A wouldn't have, and wouldn't be moved by, *if she already satisfied those strictures*.

Such concerns have moved some authors to embrace an "Advice Model" of reasons, on which A's reasons to Φ are considerations that would move a hypothetical ideally rational counterpart of A, A+, who knows about actual A's imperfections and irrationalities, to **(p. 161)** *advise* A to Φ (Smith 1995, Sobel 2001). This contrasts with the "Example Model," on which the imperfect A's reasons to Φ are considerations that would move A+, A's ideally rational counterpart, to *do* Φ. The Advice Model is designed to avoid the conditional fallacy worry, and to make sure that A's reasons are appropriately tailored to her actual circumstance, including her imperfections. The ideal advisor A+ knows, for example, whether the actual A lacks virtue, and can tailor her advice to A so as to appropriately take account of this lack. And notice that the Advice Model gives up the Deliberative Constraint. For the Advice Model is compatible with holding that, although *p* is a reason for A to Φ, there may be *no* possible version of A who would be moved to *do* Φ because *p* via sound deliberation. By the same token, the Advice Model also gives up on EC: the imperfect A whose reasons are at issue may lack the capacity to be moved to Φ on the basis of her reasons to Φ.

However, I doubt the conditional fallacy worry forces us to reject the Deliberative Constraint and to adopt the Advice Model. We can interpret the Constraint so that it takes account of A's imperfections after all. For we can construe the Constraint as indexing A's reasons to *individual courses* of *the best sort of deliberation that A could go through compatibly with holding fixed all the facts of the circumstance, including A's imperfections, that are relevant to A's reasons*; not to what A would be moved to do if she were generally a perfect and well-informed deliberator (Setiya 2012: 15, 2014). Then A can still have reasons to become a better deliberator generally than she is in fact, compatibly with the Constraint. Likewise, A can have reasons to become better informed than she is. Of course, what A *couldn't* have reasons to do is to take steps to remove false beliefs, *B, where the only possible sound deliberative routes that could move A to take these steps would have to rely on A's already lacking B.* Likewise, A couldn't have reasons to try to acquire new beliefs, *B, if the only sound deliberative routes that could move A to try to acquire B would have to rely on her already having B*. But these strictures seem mostly easy to satisfy. If I have reason to learn more about the history of Syracuse, I can deliberate my way into taking steps to learning without having already acquired the new information that I'm seeking. Likewise, if I learn that my beliefs about the history of Syracuse are riddled with errors (perhaps I fail a test), then I can deliberate my way to taking steps to remove those errors, without having already removed them: I can study certain books, ask experts, and so on.

Similar remarks apply to explicitly EC-friendly interpretations of the Constraint. A's reasons to become a generally better deliberator can be indexed to individual courses of sound deliberation *that the actual A has the capacity to go through*, without implying that A is a highly skilled deliberator across the board. Indeed, having the capacity to go through a given sound deliberative route doesn't imply being highly skilled at going through even this very route, just as having the capacity to swim doesn't imply being a highly skilled swimmer. Likewise, A's reasons to rid herself of false beliefs can be indexed to individual courses of sound deliberation that the actual A has the capacity to go through—again assuming that these very courses of deliberation needn't rely on A's already lacking these false beliefs. *Mutatis mutandis* for A's reasons to try to acquire new information, as above.

**(p. 162)** These remarks may suffice to answer the conditional fallacy worry. But of course, they leave room for further objections to the Constraint and to EC. For instance, consider EC-friendly interpretations of the Constraint. The remarks above don't completely remove the prima facie surprising optimism of holding that A's having reasons to Φ implies that A has the capacity to soundly deliberate to the conclusion to Φ on the basis of these reasons. Certainly such optimism may seem particularly ill-founded if we suppose that part of the capacity to undergo the relevant sound deliberative routes is a capacity *to know, or to reliably come to believe*, the relevant reason-giving facts that sound deliberation takes into account. For instance, it may seem implausible that past people who weren't capable of knowing about the adverse health implications of tobacco had no reason to avoid smoking it.[^42] However, we should distinguish between (a) A's capacity, *given* belief in relevant reason-giving facts, to take them into account in deliberation and to be moved by them to do what they support, and (b) A's capacity to come to believe the relevant reason-giving facts. Correspondingly, we can read EC as attributing to A either a capacity to act on her reasons, *p, provided* she believes that *p*, or, more strongly, a capacity to come to believe *p*, as well. Those attracted to EC, and to EC-friendly versions of the Constraint, should carefully consider which of these capacities they regard as constraining reasons and why.[^43] I assume, in the remainder, that defenders of EC-friendly versions of the Constraint are mainly interested in capacity (a).

There are also further objections to the Constraint, whether it's interpreted in EC-friendly ways or not. Consider the following cases, which look to be counterexamples to the Constraint:

> *James Bond:* The fact, *p*, that I have the deluded belief that I'm James Bond, is a reason for me to seek psychiatric help. But *p* is a fact, and so a reason, only if I don't believe it, and so only if I don't take it into account in deliberation. For were I to believe that I have the deluded belief that I'm James Bond—that is, were I to think of my belief that I'm James Bond *as* deluded—this would do away with my delusion. (paraphrased from Markovits 2014: 41, discussing a case from Johnson 2003: 575)

> *Soldier in a Just War*: The fact, *p*, that the inhabitants of an enemy state share a common humanity, is a reason for a soldier to fight in a just war. But the soldier shouldn't think about this fact or be moved by it in the midst of fighting, lest she lose her nerve and fight (perhaps dangerously) ineffectively. So it seems that it wouldn't be part of sound deliberation to act on the basis of one's reasons in this case. (paraphrased from Markovits 2014: 47)

**(p. 163)** In *James Bond*, the fact, *p*, that is the supposed reason for me to seek help isn't a fact that I could believe consistently with its remaining a reason for me to seek help. For as soon as I come to believe that I have the deluded belief, I no longer have it; so I no longer have the supposed reason to seek help. If so, *p* is a reason for me to Φ only if I don't come to Φ for the reason that *p*, whether via sound or unsound deliberation; for whatever else Φ-ing for the reason that *p* involves, it at least involves believing that *p.* This case challenges both the Constraint and EC.[^44] *Soldier*, on the other hand, seems compatible with EC: perhaps the soldier has the capacity to act on her reasons in this case. But the thought is that it wouldn't be part of sound deliberation for her to do so; for it would be better for her to ignore the reason-giving fact, *p*, lest she become dangerously unnerved by considering it. *Soldier* challenges the Constraint, even if not EC. (Though recall that versions of internalism that are committed to EC must also, to be plausible, adopt the Constraint. So *Soldier* does challenge EC-friendly versions of internalism, even if not EC itself.)

However, I think we can respond to these cases compatibly with the Constraint; and moreover, there's some good positive reason for the Constraint. I'll also suggest, tentatively, that there may be some related good reason for EC, too. The remainder of this section fleshes out these thoughts, aiming thereby to pinpoint what I think is a deep source of internalism's attraction.

Consider *Soldier* first. What this case suggests, I think, is at best that the common humanity of the inhabitants should only be the soldier's motivating reason *to enter the war,* not her motivating reason *to perform this combat maneuver as opposed to that.* But that is to be expected, to the extent that facts about common humanity aren't relevant to deciding between combat maneuvers (at least within certain constraints), but are only relevant to deciding whether to fight in the war at all. On the other hand, there surely are cases in which the common humanity of the inhabitants *is* relevant to deciding what to do even in the heat of combat. In such cases, intuitively, this consideration *should* guide the soldier's decisions in some way even in the heat of combat, lest she risk brutalizing those inhabitants. More to the point, it seems that it *would* be an instance of sound deliberation for the soldier to take the common humanity into account where it's relevant to what she should do, and to be moved by considering this common humanity to do what it supports. The fact that the soldier might become unnerved—and so fail to undergo the relevant sound deliberative route—doesn't show that it wouldn't, after all, be an instance of sound deliberation for the soldier to be moved by considering the reason-giving facts to do what they support.[^45]

What about *James Bond*? Suppose I can't both believe that I'm James Bond and believe that this belief is deluded, as the case claims.[^46] Then the fact that I have the deluded **(p. 164)** belief that I'm James Bond can't be a fact that I take into account in sound deliberation and thereby come to act on. Is this fact nonetheless a reason for me to seek psychiatric help? No doubt the fact that I have the deluded belief makes it in *some* sense a good idea for me to seek help. But it's unclear that we should interpret this intuitive reaction as an indication that the specific fact that I have this deluded belief is a reason for me to seek help. Perhaps my normative reason to seek help is the nearby more general fact that I have *a* deluded belief—where this general fact is one that I *can* take into account and act on. Or perhaps my deluded belief is *a reason why it would be a good thing*, or *good for me*, if I happened to find myself at a psychiatrist's office and somehow made the nature of my delusions evident. (Of course, the fact that my seeking help would be good for me might itself be a reason for me to seek help—and again, a reason I can act on.) Or the fact that I have this deluded belief might be a normative reason for *others* to seek help for me, or to urge me to go. I doubt that we can settle on the best interpretation of the case on purely pre-theoretical grounds. "Reason" is used in many ways; and our willingness to say that my deluded belief is a reason for me to seek help can be interpreted compatibly with the Constraint.[^47]

The crucial question is whether there are good positive arguments for the Constraint, and so for interpreting our reactions to cases such as *James Bond* compatibly with it. I think there are. First, the Constraint taps into very intuitive general ideas about reasons. Faced with an important decision, we usually think there's a point to trying to figure out the facts relevant to what we should do, and to trying to make our decisions in light of those facts. We try to find out what the reasons are pro and con our various options—or at least, pro and con the options most salient or important in the circumstance—and we try to deliberate well in their light. We certainly don't tend to think it better to make important decisions while seriously drunk or incapacitated, so that we have the best chance of deliberating badly or overlooking important facts. In short, we expect deliberating well in light of the reason-giving facts to help us to do what the reasons in the situation actually call for.[^48]

This leaves room for outlier cases: even if reasons are generally to be taken into account in sound deliberation, and to be acted on as a result, there may be some *James Bond* reasons that are not like this. Still, if *James Bond* cases are confined to outlier status, this fact is itself significant. It means that there's a systematic connection between reasons and sound deliberation; it merely remains to find the right formulation of that connection. But more strongly, we should ask what acknowledging the existence of outlier *James Bond* reasons gets us. It's unclear that there's any intuitive cost to thinking, **(p. 165)** for example, that the reason in *James Bond* isn't the specific fact that I have the deluded belief that I'm James Bond, but rather some nearby fact that I *can* take account of and act on, as suggested above. If the intuitive cost of denying a general connection between reasons and good deliberation is quite high, we have some reason to prefer the Constraint, with its straightforward formulation of this connection, over admitting even such outlier cases.

There's a second, more abstract argument for the Constraint. Part of what seems important about reasons for action is their connection to *normative authority*. In particular, if A has decisive reasons to Φ, then A ought to Φ, in a sense of "ought" involving an authoritative demand on A to Φ. It's not just that A ought to Φ, say, *according to the rules of some club or game*, where the club or game rules don't themselves have authority on A: the "ought" connected to decisive reasons is a "robustly normative" or "authoritative" "ought" that somehow goes beyond the idea of "ought"-according-to-a-rule (cf. McPherson 2011). This is a common, if elusive, idea. It structures, for example, familiar debates about the authority of morality, which usually presuppose that morality's authority on us depends on our having reasons to be moral. It's also part of what makes various subjectivist and internalist theses about reasons look potentially troubling: recall the concern to make sure that we have reasons to act morally well. (And contrast the *lack* of concern to make sure that moral requirements are backed up by, say, requirements of local etiquette.) Part of the thought here seems to be that, without reasons to be moral—where such reasons could at least sometimes be decisive—we are free to take or leave morality as a guide to action. And it seems important that, were there decisive reasons to act morally well, such reasons could impose authoritative demands to so act. (After all, if they couldn't, then, even given such reasons, we would *still* be free to take or leave morality as a guide to action.)[^49] The second argument for the Constraint is that it's plausibly a condition of making sense of reasons as imposing authoritative demands.

To see why this is so, notice that there seems to be a link between authoritative demands and *reasonable expectations*. If the facts in a situation demand of A that she Φ, then there must be some possible condition, X, that A might be in in the situation, such that if A encounters the situation while in that condition, then we can reasonably expect of A that she will Φ. The relevant notion of reasonable expectations is partly predictive, partly normative. The predictive part is that, if A is in condition X in a situation, then it's predictable that A will end up doing precisely what the facts in the situation demand of her: condition X *well-equips* A to meet authoritative demands. Without some such possible condition X, the idea that A is under an authoritative demand to Φ seems to lapse. A might of course happen, by sheer accident, to do precisely Φ. And we might apply some positive evaluative predicate to such happy accidents. (Compare Railton 1988: 408–10 on "morally fortunate" actions.) But authoritative demands to Φ require **(p. 166)** that there be some possible condition that A could be in that well-equips A to meet those demands. If there's no such possible condition, then demanding of A that she Φ seems out of place.

Here's the normative aspect of the notion of reasonable expectations: if A is under an authoritative demand to Φ, then it must be reasonable to expect it *of* her that she Φs, and to criticize her if she fails to Φ—at least absent excusing conditions. (For instance, non-culpable ignorance of relevant non-normative facts plausibly excuses.) The condition X that well-equips A to meet authoritative demands must be of a type that makes sense of the appropriateness of such criticism. And roughly, it seems that A is criticizable only for what she does or fails to do under her own steam, via the exercise of her capacities for rational agency, in the sense of capacities for considering relevant information and acting in its light. We no more criticize A for involuntary non-rational twitches than we criticize rocks for their behavior—even though there are conditions of rocks that well-equip them for certain behaviors in certain circumstances. It seems, then, that X must be some deliberative condition of A's, in the following sense: a condition in which A acts on considerations, takes in information, and makes choices in its light.

In sum, then, X must be (a) a possible deliberative condition of A's that (b) well-equips A to do precisely what the facts in the circumstance demand of her. Without some such X, the facts in the circumstance can't demand anything of A. What deliberative condition X best satisfies (b)? The obvious answer is: the condition of deliberating soundly, where this involves taking account of the facts that impose the relevant demands, and being moved on their basis to do what they demand—whatever else it might involve. It's certainly harder to see why deliberating *badly* (e.g. drawing bizarre conclusions from relevant reasongiving facts), or taking into account only irrelevant facts that do nothing to support Φ-ing, would generally lead agents to Φ whenever the reasons so demand.

If this is right, then the Constraint is plausibly a condition of making sense of reasons as imposing authoritative demands. Reasons can impose demands on A only if there's a possible deliberative condition of A's that well-equips her to meet those demands; and the best candidate deliberative condition is the condition of deliberating soundly in light of the reason-giving facts.

These arguments aren't conclusive.[^50] But if there's anything to them, I think they point toward a deep source of the Constraint's attraction: the peculiar normative importance of reasons. It's because reasons can impose authoritative demands that there must be a sound deliberative route from considering the reason-giving facts to doing what the reasons demand. And it's because reasons are relevant to important decisions that we seek to make our decisions in their light. (With unimportant decisions, where little is at stake, we feel less pressure to seek good reasons for one option rather than another.) Do similar considerations recommend EC-friendly interpretations of the Constraint in particular? I close with a tentative suggestion that they might.

**(p. 167)** Return to the idea of reasonable expectations. The predictive aspect of this idea was that there must be some possible condition of A's that well-equips A to meet the authoritative demands that the reasons in her circumstance impose on her. Does it matter, for the presence of the demand, whether this well-equipping condition is one that A is in only in quite faraway possible worlds? Must the condition be within A's actual present motivational capacity? If it needn't be within A's actual present motivational capacity, then A's motivational situation with respect to her reasons may often be rather like the physical situation of someone who lacks the actual present capacity to jump over the Empire State Building, but is under a putative demand to do so (cf. Albritton 1985). Suppose I tell you that you ought to jump over the Empire State Building, because doing so would raise a million dollars for a good cause and you have nothing better to do right now. You would likely scoff. And you likely wouldn't think my claim any more reasonable once I observe that you "can" jump over the Empire State Building, in the sense that there's a faraway physically possible world in which a quantum event occurs that causes you to bound over the building in one huge leap. Nor would it help if I pointed to faraway worlds in which you gain superhuman powers that give you the capacity to perform the jump. Because you utterly lack the actual present capacity to perform the jump, the demand to do so seems wholly unreasonable. Importantly, it doesn't seem that your lack of physical capacity merely *excuses* you from criticism for your failure to abide by a demand that's still in force. It's not that you have decisive reasons to jump, and ought to jump, in the sense involving an authoritative demand on you to jump; rather, the putative demand itself seems to lapse.

Perhaps it's the same with motivational capacities. It's a familiar thought that degrees of maturity and health in our motivational capacities can affect what demands we are under. As we grow from childhood to adolescence and adulthood, our reasons and obligations change, and not just because our physical age or other non-motivational circumstances change. If one's capacities to respond motivationally to reason-giving facts in appropriate ways never mature, then many of the usual changes in reasons and obligations seem not to occur. In *some* way, then, our reasons and related obligations seem to be constrained by our motivational capacities. Whether this connection takes the form, specifically, of EC and EC-friendly versions of the Constraint—so that the existence of reasons for A to Φ depends on A's capacity to Φ for those very reasons—depends, I suggest, on how we settle various questions about the *normative* aspect of reasonable expectations. Which motivational incapacities merely excuse from otherwise reasonable criticism, and which ones make the criticism, and the associated demand to Φ, lapse entirely? Perhaps some motivational incapacities neither excuse nor make the demand lapse. Being thoroughly vicious may involve such incapacities, leaving in place reasons to act morally well despite one's incapacity to act on them. And perhaps this is so because the relevant motivational incapacities are themselves ones that mature agents can be reasonably expected to have rid themselves of.

Whatever the case may be, I suggest we can best make progress on the merits of EC and EC-friendly versions of the Constraint via such questions about reasonable expectations. There's some plausibility to the idea that, *if* the deliberative condition that would wellequip A to meet the demands imposed by the reason-giving facts in her **(p. 168)** circumstance is *blamelessly* outside of A's current motivational reach—in the way that the physical condition in which I jump over the Empire State Building is blamelessly outside of my current physical capacity—then the supposed demand that I'm not well-equipped to meet lapses. The truth in the vicinity of EC may be more nuanced than the simple capacity version allows: the existence of reasons for A to Φ might be constrained by *some* of A's motivational capacities to act on the relevant reasons—those capacities she would be blameless to lack—and not others. Such versions of internalism await detailed development. Still, I suggest that the connections between reasons, authoritative demands, and reasonable expectations are a deep source of the attraction of the central internalist idea that reasons depend, in some important non-trivial way, on some motivational facts about the agents whose reasons they are. (For related discussion of reasons and abilities, see Streumer, Chapter 10 this volume, and Lord 2015.)

## **6.5 Conclusion**

I've been concerned with the prospects for versions of internalism that accept EC. I considered different interpretations of EC, traced the connections between EC and Williams's Internalism, and noted that each is committed to the Deliberative Constraint (6.3). I tentatively defended the Constraint, whether in EC-friendly versions or not, against recent objections by, for example, Sobel, Smith, and Markovits; and I suggested that a deep source of the attraction of the Constraint, and also perhaps of EC or some thesis close to EC, is the peculiar normative importance of reasons: that when A has decisive reasons to Φ, A ought to Φ, in a sense that places a genuine and authoritative demand on A.

I think it's the normative importance of reasons that also makes it hard to accept the suggestion that, even if morally nasty agents lack reasons to be moral, we might still be able to adequately criticize them in other terms. (For this suggestion, see Manne 2014, Williams 2001: 95–6.) If morally nasty agents have no reason to be moral, then it seems that moral requirements don't impose genuinely authoritative demands on those agents. And this is hard to accept. If the foregoing is right, however, then the very importance of normative reasons is also what makes it appealing to think of reasons in internalist terms —and so in terms that potentially leave the vicious without reasons to be moral after all.

The importance of normative reasons makes it urgent to find reasons to be moral, but is also part of what, in the end, problematizes the idea that we all have such reasons.[^51]

## **References**

Albritton, R. (1985). "Freedom of the Will and Freedom of Action." *Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association* 59(2): 239–51.

Bird, A. (1998). "Dispositions and Antidotes." *Philosophical Quarterly* 48(191): 227–34.

Dancy, J. (2004). *Ethics Without Principles*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Fara, M. (2005). "Dispositions and Habituals." *Noûs* 39(1): 43–92.

Fara, M. (2008). "Masked Abilities and Compatibilism." *Mind* 117(468): 843–65.

Finlay, S. (2009). "The Obscurity of Internal Reasons." *Philosophers' Imprint* 9(7): 1–22.

Finlay, S., and M. Schroeder (2008/2012). "Reasons for Action: Internal vs. External." In E. N. Zalta (ed.), *The Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy*. <**http://plato.stanford.edu/ archives/win2012/entries/reasons-internal-external/**>.

Frankfurt, H. (1988). "Rationality and the Unthinkable." In *The Importance of What We Care About*, 177–90. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Frankfurt, H. (1999). "Autonomy, Necessity, and Love." In *Necessity, Volition, and Love*, 129–41. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

Johnson, R. (1999). "Internal Reasons and the Conditional Fallacy." *Philosophical Quarterly* 49: 53–71.

Johnson, R. (2003). "Internal Reasons: Reply to Brady, van Roojen and Gert." *Philosophical Quarterly* 53(213): 573–80.

Korsgaard, C. M. (1986). "Skepticism about Practical Reason." *Journal of Philosophy* 83: 5–25.

Korsgaard, C. M. (1996). *The Sources of Normativity*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Korsgaard, C. M. (2009). *Self-Constitution: Agency, Identity, and Integrity*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Lord, E. (2015). "Acting for the Right Reasons: Abilities, and Obligation." In R. Shafer-Landau (ed.), *Oxford Studies in Metaethics*, vol. 10, 26–52. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Manne, K. (2014). "Internalism about Reasons: Sad but True?" *Philosophical Studies* 167: 89–117.

Markovits, J. (2011a). "Internal Reasons and the Motivating Intuition." In M. Brady (ed.), *New Waves in Metaethics*, 141–65. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Markovits, J. (2011b). "Why Be an Internalist About Reasons?" In R. S. Landau (ed.), *Oxford Studies in Metaethics*, vol. 6, 255–79. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Markovits, J. (2014). *Moral Reason*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

McDowell, J. (1995). "Might There Be External Reasons?" In J. E. J. Altham and R. Harrison (eds), *World, Mind, and Ethics*, 68–85. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

McPherson, T. (2011). "Against Quietist Normative Realism." *Philosophical Studies* 154: 223–40.

Molnar, G. (2003). *Powers: A Study in Metaphysics*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Paakkunainen, H. (2017). "Can There Be Government House Reasons for Action?" *Journal of Ethics and Social Philosophy* 12 (1): 56-93.

Parfit, D. (2011). *On What Matters*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Pettit, P., and M. Smith (1990). "Backgrounding Desire." *Philosophical Review* 99(4): 565– 92.

Railton, P. (1988). "How Thinking about Character and Utilitarianism Might Lead to Rethinking the Character of Utilitarianism." *Midwest Studies in Philosophy* 13: 398–416.

Scanlon, T. (1998). *What We Owe to Each Other*. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Scanlon, T. (2014). *Being Realistic about Reasons*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Schroeder, M. (2007). *Slaves of the Passions*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Schroeder, M. (2009). "Having Reasons." *Philosophical Studies* 139: 57–71.

Setiya, K. (2007). *Reasons without Rationalism*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

**(p. 170)** Setiya, K. (2009). "Reply to Bratman and Smith." *Analysis* 69(3): 531–40.

Setiya, K. (2012). "Internal Reasons." In K. Setiya and H. Paakkunainen (eds), *Internal Reasons: Contemporary Readings*, 1–3. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Setiya, K. (2014). "What Is a Reason to Act?" *Philosophical Studies* 167: 221–35.

Smith, M. (1987). "The Humean Theory of Motivation." *Mind* 96(381): 36–61.

Smith, M. (1994). *The Moral Problem*. Oxford: Blackwell.

Smith, M. (1995). "Internal Reasons." *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research* 55(1): 109–31.

Smith, M. (2003). "Rational Capacities, or: How to Distinguish Recklessness, Weakness, and Compulsion." In S. Stroud and C. Tappolet (eds), *Weakness of Will and Practical Irrationality*, 17–38. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Smith, M. (2009). "Reasons With Rationalism After All." *Analysis* 69(3): 521–30.

Smith, M. (2010). "Beyond the Error Theory." In R. Joyce and S. Kirchin (eds), *A World Without Values*, 119–40. Dordrecht: Springer.

Smith, M. (2015). "The Magic of Constitutivism." *American Philosophical Quarterly* 52: 187–200.Sobel, D. (1999). "Do the Desires of Rational Agents Converge?" *Analysis* 59(3): 137–47.

Sobel, D. (2001). "Explanation, Internalism, and Reasons for Action." *Social Philosophy and Policy* 18: 218–35.

Sobel, D. (2009). Review of Mark Schroeder's *Slaves of the Passions*. *Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews*. <**http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/slaves-of-the-passions/**>.

Sobel, D. (2011). "Parfit's Case against Subjectivism." In R. Shafer-Landau (ed.), *Oxford Studies in Metaethics*, vol. 6, 52–78. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Street, S. (2009). "In Defense of Future Tuesday Indifference: Ideally Coherent Eccentrics and the Contingency of What Matters." *Philosophical Issues* 19(1): 273–98.

Street, S. (2017). "Nothing 'Really' Matters, But That's Not What Matters." In P. Singer (ed.), *Does Anything Really Matter? Parfit on Objectivity*, ch. 6. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Tenenbaum, S. (ed.) (2010). *Desire, Practical Reason, and the Good*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Velleman, D. (2009). *How We Get Along*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Williams, B. (1979). "Internal and External Reasons." Repr. in *Moral Luck*, 101–13 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981).

Williams, B. (1981). *Moral Luck*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Williams, B. (1995a). "Internal Reasons and the Obscurity of Blame." In *Making Sense of Humanity and Other Philosophical Papers*, 35–45. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Williams, B. (1995b). "Internal and External Reasons (Reply to McDowell)." In J. E. J. Altham and R. Harrison (eds), *World, Mind, and Ethics*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Repr. in K. Setiya and H. Paakkunainen (eds), *Internal Reasons: Contemporary Readings* (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2012).

Williams, B. (2001). "Internal and External Reasons, with Postscript." In E. Millgram (ed.), *Varieties of Practical Reasoning*, 77–98. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

## **Notes:**

[^1]: These tendencies of Axl's are "background" factors that explain why the consideration that his visit would aggravate Bea figures in the "foreground" of Axl's practical thought, as the consideration on which he acts. I'll restrict the term "motivating reasons" for such foreground considerations, the considerations on which, or reasons for which, agents act. The background factors explaining why certain considerations figure in the foreground are also sometimes called "motivating reasons": see e.g. Pettit and Smith (1990).

[^2]: It's a further question whether agents can act on a consideration without *conceiving* of it as justifying their action. The thesis that they can't is one version of the thesis that action must take place "under the guise of the good." For discussion, see Tenenbaum (2010) and Setiya (2007).

[^3]: Though Williams (1981: 102) is also clear that sometimes it's appropriate to explain actions in other ways than by appeal to motivating reasons—e.g. by appeal to neurological facts.

[^4]: I follow Williams in using the unadorned "reasons" to refer to normative reasons. For motivating reasons, I use either "motivating reasons," the "reasons for which," or "considerations on which" an agent acts; or "because *p*."

[^5]: I comment on some of this controversy, and give references, in 6.3.

[^6]: Although Street's own view is that A's reasons are a function of A's *attitudes* more broadly, not that they depend on A's motivations in particular.

[^7]: There are other views called "internalist" that aren't about the conditions of *p*'s being a normative reason. On *normative judgment internalism*, normative judgments about reasons or oughts bear a necessary connection to motivation. On *morality/reasons internalism*, moral requirements necessarily provide reasons for action for every agent. (This is often called "moral rationalism.") Our topic, sometimes called "existence internalism" about reasons, is distinct from each of these.

[^8]: There isn't total terminological agreement here. Schroeder (2007) and Markovits (2014) both defend versions of a view on which what it is for *p* to be a reason for A to Φ is for *p* to bear a certain relation to A's existing motivations; but Schroeder calls his view "hypotheticalism," while Markovits calls her view "internalism." Sobel (2001) reserves the title "internalism" for views that accept EC (cf. Setiya 2012), and "subjectivism" for views that reject EC but nonetheless link an agent's reasons to her motivations (contrary to e.g. Markovits 2014, whose "internalism" rejects EC). In the terminology of Finlay and Schroeder (2008/2012: §1.1.1–2), subjectivism in Sobel's sense is a "State View," not a "Motivation View"; and in its typical developments, subjectivism is a "Counterfactual

State" view, holding that an agent's reasons depend on, or are a function of, the motivational states she would be in in certain idealized conditions.

[^9]: Cf. Finlay and Schroeder's discussion at (2008/2012: §1.1.2).

[^10]: I take the label "Deliberative Constraint" from Schroeder (2007: 26, 33).

[^11]: Among contingent features of individual agents' motivational profiles, I include motivational facts that are necessary for a given individual agent—Frankfurtian "volitional necessities" (Frankfurt 1988, 1999)—though contingent for agents as such.

[^12]: There's also a further worry: that we cannot adequately analyze my nastiness itself except in terms of unresponsiveness to reasons that there are (Scanlon 1998: 367).

[^13]: One nearby position is that agents who lack moral reasons are possible but exceedingly rare (Street 2009); another, that everyone has reasons to be moral because everyone has *some* desires that morally good actions would do *something* to promote, even if the relevant desires aren't themselves intuitively pro-moral (Schroeder 2007).

[^14]: For Velleman (2009), reasons depend on a motive that every agent necessarily has, but this motive needn't lead to pro-moral behavior.

[^15]: By a "reductive" view of what it is to be a reason, I mean a view that explains how *p*'s having the property of being a reason for action is a function of other, metaphysically less mysterious facts and properties. If what it is for *p* to be a reason for A to Φ just is for *p* to bear relation R to A's motivational profile, then facts about reasons are only as mysterious as are facts about R and A's motivational profile. See e.g. Schroeder (2007) and Markovits (2014) for such reductive views; although Markovits is self-consciously not reductive about normativity more broadly, because on her account, the relation R is itself irreducibly normative (2014: 10–11).

[^16]: One complication is whether EC describes a conceptually or a metaphysically necessary connection. If conceptual, could the nature of agency, or of reasons, explain EC? Maybe not: but the concept of reasons, or of agency, might.

[^17]: Williams (1981) speaks both of necessary and sufficient conditions, but even there the arguments are aimed at establishing the necessary condition.

[^18]: Here and throughout, I elide further distinctions between there being a reason for A to Φ and A's having or possessing this reason (see Schroeder 2009)—as Williams generally does (see e.g. 1981: 101). By "A has a reason to Φ," I mean that there is a reason for A to Φ.

[^19]: Cf. Sobel (2001: 221), though on EC, not W-INT.

[^20]: See e.g. Sobel (2001), Setiya (2012), Markovits (2014) and Manne (2014).

[^21]: Manne (2014: 90, n. 2) nicely notes this simplifying assumption by Williams. Though contrast Williams (1981: 104).

[^22]: Sobel (2001: 222–3) seems to read Williams as attempting to mount a one-premise deductive argument from EC to W-INT; and complains that depending on how we read EC, the argument either begs the question or doesn't entail W-INT. I think there are more charitable ways to read Williams.

[^23]: I return to this at the end of 6.3. For a now-classic defense of the "Humean Theory of Motivation," in a somewhat less liberal version than that of Williams, see Smith (1987, 1994: ch. 4). I comment on contrasting "Kantian" views briefly below. A terminological note: Williams sometimes calls all elements in A's S "desires," but makes it clear that he means this term to cover the broad possibilities he describes (1981: 105).

[^24]: Cf. Finlay and Schroeder's discussion at (2008/2012: §2.1.1).

[^25]: McDowell's (1995) response to Williams, which I comment on below, proposes something like this view.

[^26]: This holds regardless of whether we read EC, W-INT, and VIRTUE AND REASONS as making claims about conceptually or just metaphysically necessary conditions on reasons.

[^27]: Or at least a capacity that the agent has at the same time as she has the reason. If the reason is one that the agent will have in the future, then the relevant capacity would likewise be a future actual capacity. For example, it can be that the future adult that will develop from a toddler will have a normative reason to park the car, even if the toddler now lacks the capacity to act on such a reason. For simplicity, I restrict focus to present reasons and capacities in the text.

[^28]: For a subjunctive analysis of rational capacities, see Smith (2003). For problems with subjunctive analyses of capacities generally, see Bird (1998), Fara (2005; cf. 2008), and Molnar (2003: ch. 4). Much of the literature on internalism formulates it, and EC, in subjunctive terms (see e.g. Finlay and Schroeder 2008/2012). Setiya (2012: 8–9) is an exception.

[^29]: Thanks to Kim Frost for helpful discussion of capacities—although of course all mistakes are mine.

[^30]: In the literature on the metaphysics of capacities or powers, they are not generally clearly distinguished from dispositions. See e.g. Molnar (2003) and Fara (2008).

[^31]: It's noteworthy that e.g. Finlay's more recent (2009) article, which contains an otherwise admirable and clear survey of ways to interpret the Classic Argument, makes no mention of the possibility of a "capacity" reading of its premises.

[^32]: The interpretation of Korsgaard (1986) is complicated by the fact that she often formulates the "Internalism Requirement" (her version of EC), which she accepts, as the claim that reasons must be capable of motivating "rational" agents; and "rational" for her sometimes seems to mean *fully* rational, in a sense ruling out all irrationalities. But Korsgaard also thinks that we can infer from facts about what "full" rationality is like to facts about what agents as such are capable of. I return to the underlying optimism about agents' capacities below; it's a major theme in Setiya (2012).

[^33]: The contrast here is sometimes put as being between "procedural" and "substantive" conceptions of rationality, with Williams falling on the "procedural" side and McDowell on the "substantive" side (see e.g. Finlay 2009: 4 and Markovits 2014: 6, 10–11, *et passim*). I bypass this terminology here, as I think it can wrongly suggest an overly neat stock of options.

[^34]: Although Korsgaard's view also differs from McDowell's in potentially important ways. For Korsgaard (2009), deliberation proceeds *in accord with moral principles*; not just from moral "starting points" as inputs into broadly instrumental deliberation.

[^35]: As for Williams, "sound deliberation" precludes reliance on false factual beliefs, whatever else it precludes. Recall that, throughout, I'm implicitly restricting the discussion to *decisive* reasons (cf. the discussion at the beginning of 6.3).

[^36]: In contrast, VIRTUE AND REASONS wouldn't explain EC, at least if McDowell is right that an agent's present actual capacities for deliberation needn't include the capacity to deliberate virtuously.

[^37]: Though recall that having an actual present capacity to X is compatible with (at least contingent) impediments to doing X (the cramp in the swimming case). Presumably having the actual present capacity to go through a sound deliberative route is likewise compatible with contingent impediments to exercising this capacity on an occasion. Cf. Williams' remarks on deliberation and what's "possible" for an agent in his (1995b) reply to McDowell.

[^38]: Cf. Sobel (2001: 223).

[^39]: Cf. Williams' remark (1995b: n. 2) that it "best preserves the point of the internalism/ externalism distinction to see [Korsgaard's view] as a limiting case of internalism."

[^40]: Finlay's (2009) interpretation of Williams is in some ways similar to this one. But for Finlay, Williamsian deliberation seeks first-personal explanations of action: explanations, for oneself, of why one would Φ if one deliberated well.

[^41]: Williams (2012: 92–3). Cf. Johnson (1999).

[^42]: Thanks to David Sobel for this example, and for pressing me to address capacities for knowledge of reason-giving facts.

[^43]: See Lord (2015) for relevant discussion; cf. Sepielli, Ch. 33 this volume, on "objective" (in the sense of fact-relative) reasons and "subjective" (in the sense of relative to the agent's epistemic predicament) reasons.

[^44]: For similar cases, see Smith (2009: 523), Schroeder (2007: 33), and Sobel (2001: 231, 2009).

[^45]: W-INT—even in its capacity version—is likewise compatible with thinking that agents might fail, perhaps through becoming unnerved, to undergo the sound deliberative routes to which their reasons correspond.

[^46]: We might doubt this: compare having deep-set prejudicial beliefs that manifest themselves in actions and reactions even while one explicitly and consciously believes those prejudicial beliefs to be false. But I set aside this concern here.

[^47]: Cf. Setiya (2009: 538) on Smith (2009: 523). Markovits also suggests further cases, some patterned after the ones I've considered, and some that involve "state-given" reasons to have an *intention* (e.g. to retaliate against nuclear attacks in kind): reasons that stem not from what would be the case if one acted on the intention, but rather from the good (e.g. deterrent) *consequences of merely having the intention* (and having the intention be known). I ignore cases of this latter type, since our concern is with reasons for action; and reasons for intention that are also reasons to perform the action intended aren't "state-given" in the above sense.

[^48]: Cf. Schroeder (2007: 132).

[^49]: This leaves it open that *some* reasons, even if not outweighed by contrary reasons, merely "entice" or recommend (Dancy 2004: 21). Still, if even the strongest reasons to abide by moral requirements left it entirely normatively optional whether to do so—as they would, if they merely entice or recommend without demanding—this wouldn't be much of a vindication of morality's authority.

[^50]: I develop the above arguments for the Deliberative Constraint in more detail in Paakkunainen 2017.

[^51]: I'm grateful to Daniel Star, David Sobel, Alex King, Kim Frost, and John Brunero for extremely helpful feedback on earlier drafts.
