# 8. Psychologism and Anti-Psychologism about Motivating Reasons

*Eric Wiland*

### **Abstract and Keywords**

People do things for various reasons. Are these motivating reasons psychological? This question is the focus of this chapter. I argue here that such reasons are typically not purely psychological. Yet there is an important psychological element or aspect of these reasons. I proceed by first reviewing some arguments for and against psychologism about (motivating) reasons. Next, I do the same for the view that reasons are typically non-psychological facts. I then explore some additional alternatives: (a) disjunctivist views, (b) the appositional account, and finally (c) naïve action theory, which I favour. Naïve action theory transcends and preserves the best features of both standard psychologism and standard anti-psychologism.

Keywords: psychologism, motivating reasons, factualism, disjunctivism, Jonathan Dancy, naïve action theory

## **8.1 Introduction**

People do things for various reasons. Are these motivating reasons psychological? This question is the focus of this chapter. I argue here that such reasons are typically not psychological. Yet there is an important psychological element or aspect of these reasons.

Let's start with a humdrum example. Suppose Fred is searching for his bow tie. We might wonder what his reason for doing so is. Later, we learn that Fred is scheduled to impersonate George Will at a comedy club. Let's suppose there's nothing else funny about the case. We now seem to know what Fred's reason for searching for his bow tie is. But how are we to best characterize this reason? We might think that Fred's reason for searching for his bow tie is or involves some aspect of his own mind. One candidate is "Fred *wants* to wear his bow tie to the comedy club." Or, more complexly, "Fred *wants* to wear his bow tie to the comedy club, and he *believes* that he needs to search for his bow tie in order to wear it to the comedy club." The psychological details might not matter so much here. What matters is that his reason for action seems to be psychological.

But we might think about Fred's reason a different way: Fred is searching for his bow tie for the reason that he will be impersonating George Will at the comedy club tonight. And that's a fact. And it is also the reason he is looking for his bow tie. Indeed, if you were to ask Fred himself why he was searching for his bow tie, he might say something about the evening's event rather than his own mind. This suggests that the reason for which Fred acts is not psychological at all. It's a part of the (non-psychological) world.

So are motivating reasons for action psychological or not? Before we prosecute this debate, it's important first to pinpoint the target concept. We are discussing **(p. 198)** reasons for acting. There are reasons why things (including things such as actions) occur that are not themselves reasons for acting. For example, the reason why I yelled at my critic might be that I am very tired. But this reason, a reason why I yelled, is not itself a reason for which I yelled. At best, motivating reasons for action are a proper subset of reasons why actions occur. The two are not perfectly coextensive (see Alvarez 2009).

Further, a person can be motivated by things that are not themselves motivating *reasons*. And at least some of these motives are psychological attitudes. You might be motivated to clean your bathtub every day because you are afraid that your deceased mother will somehow criticize you for your slovenly ways. You are terrorized by memories of the way she disapproved of the way you kept your bedroom, and this terror is affecting you now. Your fear, however, is not a *reason* for which you are cleaning your bathtub. Nevertheless, your fear is motivating you to break out the scrub brush. Sometimes feeling, moods, desires, and emotions motivate us to do things, without thereby being reasons for which we do them. Those who deny that motivating reasons are psychological attitudes recognize that people can be motivated by psychological attitudes. They claim only that in such cases the psychological attitude isn't a motivating reason.

The kind of reason for acting investigated here, a motivating reason, is often distinguished from a normative reason for action (see Smith 1987, 1994). A normative reason for action *justifies* acting in a particular way. You might have a normative reason to clean your kitchen now. But you aren't cleaning your kitchen now; you are instead reading this chapter. It might be true that you have a normative reason to clean your kitchen even if you aren't the least bit motivated to do so, even if there is *nothing* you are doing for that reason. It appears that often people are not motivated to do what they have normative reason to do. Alas, alack. This is why it seems to make sense to distinguish normative reasons from motivating reasons.

But I also want to note that some (the author included) think that the distinction between motivating reasons and normative reasons distorts the phenomena. This distinction encourages the thought that there are two distinct kinds of reasons for action, whereas it might instead be true that there is only one kind of reason for action, and only some of these reasons motivate. The fact that only some reasons motivate does not itself entail that motivating reasons form a distinct class of reasons, no more than the fact that only some airplanes are operational entails that operational airplanes form a distinct class. I won't pursue this distinction further right here. (For more on this distinction, see the

Chapter 7 this volume by McNaughton and Rawling, as well as a brief discussion below.) In order to remain neutral about the propriety of the distinction, from now on, whenever I refer to reasons without any qualification, I mean to refer to what those who do draw this distinction mean by "motivating reasons."

I proceed by first reviewing some arguments for and against psychologism about (motivating) reasons. Next, I do the same for the view that reasons are typically non-psychological facts. I then explore some additional alternatives: (a) disjunctivist views, (b) the appositional account, and finally (c) naïve action theory, which I favor.

## **(p. 199) 8.2 Psychologism**

If there is a standard view about motivating reasons, it is psychologism. It seems that most philosophers hold that a person's reasons for action either are or essentially depend upon the psychological attitudes of the person whose reasons they are. It would help to examine a particular argument for a psychologistic view of motivating reasons.

Donald Davidson's (1963) is the most influential example of such a view. He held that a reason for action is a pair of related psychological attitudes. One of these is what he calls a pro-attitude. A pro-attitude is one of a wide variety of possible psychological stances, including "desires, wantings, urges, promptings, and a great variety of moral views, aesthetic principles, economic prejudices, social conventions, and public and private goals and values in so far as these can be interpreted as attitudes of an agent directed toward actions of a certain kind." That's quite a list. The second attitude is a belief that some specific action would satisfy this pro-attitude.

Davidson (1963: 686) then writes: "Giving the reason why an agent did something is often a matter of naming the pro attitude (a) or the related belief (b) or both; let me call this pair the primary reason why the agent performed the action." For instance, I might (1) want to turn on the light and (2) believe that if I flip this switch, I will turn on the light. When I flip the switch, my reason for doing so is just this pair of psychological attitudes, 1 and 2.

Reasons are pairs of psychological attitudes, Davidson thought, because only pairs of psychological attitudes can explain actions in the way that reasons do. When you act for a reason, your reason explains what you do. Any account of reasons should be able to capture this explanatory function of reasons for action. We can explain an action in the way reasons do just by citing the pair of psychological attitudes that explains your action.1

But why think that only psychological attitudes can explain action in this way? Davidson argues that an account of reasons needs to account for the following phenomenon. You can *have* two or more reasons for one and the same action, and yet *act* on only one of the two reasons. Thus only one of the several reasons you have is really a motivating reason; the rest are merely normative reasons. For instance, as Kant noted, you might charge your inexperienced customer the ordinary price either because it is honest to do so, or to

preserve your reputation for honesty, thereby earning the most money. You might *have* these two reasons. And yet it is possible to act only to preserve your reputation for honesty, and not at all for the reason that it is indeed honest. Davidson worried that an account of reasons for action that is purely "logical" or "justificatory" probably will not be subtle enough to distinguish between reasons that are **(p. 200)** genuinely explanatory and those that are idle. Reasons thus must be psychologically real in order to explain what reasons explain.

Here's a related argument for the same conclusion. Two people could be in the same circumstances, and yet act for different reasons. Since their circumstances are identical, the only way to explain how the two are acting for different reasons must involve something different about the people themselves: their psychological attitudes.

But we should be careful in drawing conclusions. These arguments do seem to show that psychological attitudes play *some* role in reasons explanations. But they do not by themselves demonstrate that reasons for action just *are* psychological attitudes, as Davidson claims.

Why think that these arguments fail to establish the more ambitious claim? We need to better understand the explanatory role that Davidson thought reasons play when they are cited in action explanation. Consider again the shopkeeper who charges his inexperienced customer the ordinary price. He does so for the reason that it preserves his reputation for honesty. But to say that this reason explains his action is just to say that this reason in some sense *causes* his action. In other words, the shopkeeper charged his inexperienced customer the ordinary price *because* doing so preserves his reputation for honesty. And so to understand what explains action in the way that reasons do, we must understand what can cause actions in the way reasons do. Reasons for action cause the actions that they are reasons for. And it seems that only psychological attitudes are poised to cause action in this way. To summarize:

- **(1)** One can have multiple reasons for some action.
- **(2)** One can act for only one of these reasons.
- **(3)** The best way to account for the difference between the reason one acts upon and
- the reasons one does not is that only the former reason causes the action.
- **(4)** A reason can cause an action only if the reason is psychological.

Let's evaluate each claim. The first seems highly plausible. If crude rational hedonism were true, then one would have only one reason for any action: (a desire for) pleasure. But reasons pluralism seems true.

The second claim seems plausible too. But it can be questioned. Suppose that reasons are just Davidsonian belief–desire pairs. Why, then, should we be certain that you can *have* such a reason that is in fact *entirely* motivationally inert? If psychological attitudes are characterized functionally, and if desiring is just a matter of being motivated, then it is ar

guable that one could not genuinely have a desire to V without this being at least slightly causally responsible for any V-ing that one does.

Here's a better argument against the second claim. Consider the case of multiple reasons for *belief*. Suppose that someone tells you it's now raining outside. Suppose also that you remember feeling the rain when you were outside a few moments ago. You thus seem to have two reasons to believe that it is now raining. If you really have both of these reasons, is it possible to believe that it is raining for only one of the two?

**(p. 201)** If you are unaware of one of the two reasons—possibly you failed to understand what the speaker said—then of course you might then believe that it is now raining for only the reason that you remember that it was raining a few moments ago. But then you really don't *have* the other reason. So this example does not show that you can believe something for only one of the reasons you *have*.

But let's imagine that you do have or grasp both reasons for believing that it is raining outside. Can't you still believe it for only one of them? We must be careful to distinguish the question "For what reason do you believe that?" from the superficially similar questions "For what reason did you start believing that?" and "How did you come to believe that?" A person may believe p for one reason, and later acquire a second reason for believing it, at which point she then believes p for both reasons. That she later believes p for both reasons is not contradicted by the fact that she came to believe p for only one reason. How she came to believe p, and for what reason(s) she now believes p, are not identical matters.

We must admit that we sometimes say things like "I believe p because of q, not r." But (a) sometimes this indicates only that the speaker does not take r to be a reason at all. Granting that does not show that the speaker failed to believe p for a reason she had. And (b) sometimes this claim means that q but not r is a *sufficient* reason for believing p. Granting that does not indicate that r is no reason for believing p at all. Finally, (c) sometimes the claim means that q is merely the most important reason for believing p. And that, of course, is compatible with r also being a reason for believing p. It seems that thinking about reasons for belief will not help us see that you can act for only some of the reasons you have.

I do think, however, there is a way to vindicate the second claim. To do this, we need to return to the case of action. Suppose the shopping mall closes in thirty minutes. You want to buy a scarf at the mall, so you have a reason to go there right now. You also want to return some shoes to a store at the mall, so you have a second reason to go there right now. But you know that you do not have enough time to do both things. So, you could go to the store for either reason. But it would be somewhat irrational or senseless to go to the mall for *both* reasons, this because you can't accomplish both ends. And since it would be irrational to go to the mall for both reasons, it must be at least possible to go to the mall for only one of them. Thus, it is possible to act for only one of multiple reasons for the same action, reasons that the agent fully grasps.2

Let's next look at the third claim, which says that the way to account for the difference between the reason one acts upon and the reasons one does not is that only the former reason *causes* the action. This claim specifies in virtue of what an agent can act for one reason rather than another: it is because only the one reason causes the action for which it is a reason. Reasons explanation is claimed to be a form of causal explanation.

**(p. 202)** Whether reasons for actions are causes of the actions for which they are reasons is a venerated philosophical topic, one we will be unable to resolve here. But it is perfectly natural to use expressions like "I am searching for my bow tie because I'm impersonating George Will tonight," expressions that link an action and a reason with a "because." And so there is at least a prima facie case that the link between the two is indeed causal.

Even so, there are causes and there are causes. One possibility is that a reason is an *efficient* cause of the action for which it is a reason. Another is that it is a *formal* cause of the action for which it is a reason.3 Yet another alternative but compatible possibility is that the reason is a *final* cause of the action for which it is a reason. Since the fourth claim above is based upon the third, we must be sure that both claims employ the same notion of causation. The fourth claim—that only psychological attitudes cause action—is most plausible if the type of causation in question is efficient causation. If an action has an efficient cause, it is most plausible that it is psychological in nature.

So let's understand the reference to causation in the third claim also as efficient causation: the best way to account for the difference between the reason one acts upon and the reasons one does not is that only the former reason *efficiently* causes the action. (Hereafter, "causation" means efficient causation unless otherwise qualified.) It is widely thought that this view faces a serious problem: a psychological attitude can cause an action even though the action was not performed for that attitude. If this is true, then the difference between a reason for which one acts and a reason one does not act cannot be that only the former causes the action for which it is a reason, since a reason for which one does *not* act for may nevertheless cause an action. Davidson himself recognized this problem, the problem of *deviant causal chains*. To illustrate, let's consider his own example.

A climber might want to rid himself of the weight and danger of holding another man on a rope, and he might know that by loosening his hold on the rope he could rid himself of the weight and danger. This belief and want might so unnerve him as to cause him to loosen his hold, and yet it might be the case that he never chose to loosen his hold, nor did he do it intentionally. (Repr. in Davidson 1980: 79)

The climber has a belief–desire pair that, if psychological attitudes are reasons, is a reason for loosening his hold on the rope. The climber's belief–desire pair causes him to loosen his hold on the rope. Yet the belief–desire pair is not a reason for which he loosened the rope; he did not loosen the rope for any reason—it was a mistake. But if reasons are just psychological states that together cause the kind of action mentioned in the be

lief, then it would be difficult to explain just why the climber's psychological states are *not* motivating reasons.

The problem of deviant causal chains has spawned a tsunami of literature (Stout 2010). This is not the place to review or even summarize this literature. Suffice it for now to say that it remains a worry for causal theories of action.

**(p. 203)** Perhaps the most promising response to this problem is a partners-in-guilt approach. *Many* notions are naturally understood as at least partially causal; for example, some perception is a memory only if it is caused by another perception with the same content. But clever philosophers can generate examples wherein the causation happens through some bizarre way, and thus the resulting perception is not a genuine memory. The solution to this general problem seems to be to specify *which* way an impression causes a memory, or here, which way a pair of psychological attitudes causes an action. Davidson himself observed that psychological attitudes must cause the action in the *right* way. But even if true, we still don't know what it *is* to be the right way. We should acknowledge that there is more work to do. If reasons are psychological attitudes that cause in the right way the action for which they are a reason, what *is* the right way? I suspect there is ultimately no way of providing a substantive answer to this question, as is suggested by the fact that there is still no generally agreed-upon solution to the problem of deviant causal chains.

But the case for psychologism depends not on whether an argument for it is airtight, but on whether the argument for it is better than the argument for any alternative view. So, let's turn to its rivals.

## **8.3 Factualism**

If we view the task of giving reasons for action as the task of explaining another person's action, it will be natural to do so by referring to her psychological attitudes. Psychologism and the third-person perspective mesh well.

Things look differently from the first-person perspective. If I am asked the reason for which I am (for example) looking for my keyring, I am apt to respond by saying something about the world rather than my own mind: "My class begins in a half hour." Our friend Fred above is likewise apt to respond to a reasons-question with something like "It's for my George Will costume" or "Tonight I'm performing at the comedy club." When you consider your own reason for acting, your attention typically focuses on the world, not yourself. Reasons appear to be non-psychological facts.

One reason to privilege the first-person standpoint is that intentional action itself is the sort of process or event about which the agent has unmediated knowledge (Anscombe 2000, Setiya 2007). When you are writing a letter to your brother, you know this without needing to *observe* what you are up to in the way that another person would. You don't need to see or guess what you are doing. You just know that you are writing a letter to

your brother. If you don't know that you are writing a letter to your brother, then you aren't writing a letter to your brother intentionally. Intentional actions, unlike other processes, are typically like this. And since the set of actions performed for reasons is identical to (or nearly exhausts) the set of actions performed intentionally, it is natural to think that the first-person perspective is likewise central to characterizing what it is to act for a reason. This supports the thought that what seems to the agent to motivate her is really what motivates her: facts about the world she faces.

**(p. 204)** One might be tempted to think that prioritizing the first-person perspective does *not* oppose psychologism. For whenever it appears to be true that an agent acts for some non-psychological reason ("He's looking for his bow tie because he's performing at the comedy club later"), some psychological version of this statement is still also true ("He's looking for his bow tie because he believes that he's performing at the comedy club later" and/or "He's looking for his bow tie because he wants to perform at the comedy club later"). But *this* fact by itself does not establish that reasons are indeed psychological; indeed, Thomas Nagel (1971) famously argued that the always-available psychological explanation depends upon the non-psychological explanation, rather than the other way around. Nevertheless, the fact that substituting a psychological explanation is always possible does play an important role in a larger argument favoring psychologism.

To see this, consider next the fact that agents are sometimes wrong about how things are. Fred might be looking for his bow tie despite the fact that he is confused about when he is scheduled to perform at the comedy club. Suppose he was really scheduled to perform last night! Even so, Fred is now looking for his bow tie for a reason. But it appears that he isn't doing so for the reason that he is performing at the comedy club tonight, since as a matter of fact, he is not. Fred may be *thinking* that he is searching for his bow tie because he is performing tonight, but if so he is wrong about what his reason is. Instead, it appears that Fred is searching for his bow tie merely because he *believes* that he is performing at the comedy club tonight. The fact that Fred believes this obtains whether *what* he believes is true or not, so his belief is available to serve as his reason in the case where he is indeed incorrect. His reason here seems to be psychological.

Let's put these two claims together. First, any reasons explanation that cites a fact as a reason implies the truth of a different explanation citing a psychological attitude as the explanans. Second, whenever someone acts for a reason, there is always a true explanation citing a psychological attitude, but not always a true reasons explanation citing a fact. That is, it is not the case that any explanation that cites a psychological attitude as an explanans implies the truth of a reasons explanation that cites a fact as a reason. Thus, explanations citing psychological attitudes, rather than non-psychological facts, seem more fundamental. This suggests that psychological attitudes are themselves reasons.

This appearance is reinforced if we focus upon the proximity of rival explanantia. Fred is searching for his bow tie because he is performing at the comedy club tonight and/or because he believes he is performing at the comedy club tonight. Even if we are tempted to go for only the former explanation, we must recognize that the explanans (he is perform

ing at the comedy club tonight) will motivate Fred only if he somehow cognitively grasps it. The explanans can't motivate Fred behind his back, as it were. So again, it seems Fred's reason for action is really something about his psychology. His psychological attitudes are in a way "closer" to the action to be rationalized than are the facts about which Fred has attitudes toward. Even if the facts distally explain his **(p. 205)** action, Fred's psychological attitudes proximately explain it. And the more proximate explanation can seem more relevant. Perhaps the Big Bang is the *ultimate* distal explanation for Fred's action. But when we ask for the reason for his action, we are asking about something much more proximate than that. His psychological attitudes appear to do the trick.

Arthur Collins (1997), however, has offered a powerful reply on behalf of the factualist. When Fred tells us that he is searching for his bow tie because he is performing at a comedy club tonight, *he* is not neutral about whether he is performing at a comedy club tonight. He is telling us that he *is* performing tonight. His explanation of his action is committed to *this*.

Now, it is indeed true that Fred could instead explain what he is up to with the words "I'm searching for my bow tie because I believe I'm performing at a comedy club tonight." That too is a satisfactory explanation. But, Collins argues, Fred does not thereby withdraw his commitment to whether he is performing at a comedy club tonight when *he* shifts to psychologistic language. Fred is still committed to the truth of the claim that he is performing at the comedy club tonight. That doesn't go away.

Inserting the words "I believe" into the explanation serves a very different function: it expresses a kind of epistemic fallibility. If Fred says "I'm searching for my bow tie because I believe I'm performing at a comedy club tonight," he thereby expresses the idea that he could be wrong about whether he is performing at a comedy club tonight. But it is one thing to acknowledge that one could be wrong. It is a very different thing to withdraw commitment altogether to the thing that one thinks one could be wrong about. Let's not confuse the two.

So no matter whether Fred explains himself by saying "I'm searching for my bow tie because I'm performing at a comedy club tonight" or by saying "I'm searching for my bow tie because I believe I'm performing at a comedy club tonight," he is committed to the truth of the claim that he is performing at a comedy club tonight. That commitment does not disappear merely by his introducing "I believe" into the explanans.

Of course, if *another* person explains Fred's action by use of the form "Fred believes ____," *she* is not thereby committed to what Fred himself is. She can remain completely neutral about whether things are as Fred believes them to be. But, Collins concludes, this just shows that the third-person and the first-person use of psychological language in the explanans of an action explanation differ from each other. And so, even though the thirdperson use of psychological language in the explanans of an action explanation takes no stand upon how things are outside the mind of the agent who is acting for a reason, the first-person standpoint remains stubbornly committed to explanantia that involve the world. Thus, so long as we think that the first-person perspective is the perspective from

which reasons for action come into view, an agent's reasons for action will not typically involve his own state of mind.

Even if Collins is right, however, we still need some way to understand the nature of the reason for which an agent acts when her belief is in fact false. Disjunctivist views offer us one way to think about this.

## **(p. 206) 8.4 Disjunctivism**

Perhaps when Fred falsely believes that he is performing at the comedy club tonight, his reason for action is some psychological attitude(s) of his. But when Fred knows that he is performing at the comedy club tonight, his reason for action is not some psychological attitude, but the world to which he is responding. Call this view *reasons disjunctivism* (see Dancy 1995b, Stout 1996). This view holds that in the normal case where the agent's views are correct, reasons are the facts to which the agent responds. But in the comparatively unusual case where the agent's view is incorrect, her reason is as psychologism holds. Of course, when the agent's relevant belief is false, she will also be mistaken about what her reason is. But that seems appropriate. So reasons disjunctivism sees reasons in two very different ways: facts in the normal case, and psychological attitudes only in the unusual case.

A psychologistic rejoinder to reasons disjunctivism takes issue with the way the form of the explanation varies with the truth of the agent's beliefs. Bernard Williams (1981), for instance, argued that the true/false distinction should not affect the form that reasons explanation take. In other words, when an agent acts in light of something she believes falsely, it seems we *have* to cite her belief in order to give her reason for so acting. Only her false belief seems to be available to explain her action. Williams argued (well, asserted) that if we must cite the agent's psychological states as her reason when the agent's beliefs are *false*, then we must also go psychological when they are true. Why think that the proper *form* of the explanation is radically different when the agent's belief is true and when it is false? The truth-value of the belief seems irrelevant to the issue about what form the reasons-explanation of her action should take.

Here are three distinct replies to Williams' argument. The first is a partners-in-guilt strategy. Disjunctivism is a respectable and plausible view in many other areas of philosophy, most notably in the case of perception (Haddock and Macpherson 2008). The fact that in cases of hallucination we do not see external objects does not imply that we fail to see external objects in all cases. Different cases sometimes call for different kinds of explanation.

A second and related reply takes issue with the way psychologism understands the case of error. Perhaps when Fred is mistaken about which night he is performing, the psychological attitude that explains his action is not a reason for his action at all. The explanation citing his psychological attitude, it may be argued, is not a *reasons* explanation, but a different sort of explanation. His psychology surely explains why he acts as he did, but perhaps there was *no* reason for which acted. We already recognize ways psychological attitudes explain action other than by citing motivating reasons for them: there are Freudian explanations, addictive explanations, and behavioral economic explanations. Perhaps *reasons* for action are always non-psychological, but whenever we have to explain an action by mentioning a false belief, we have left the field of reasons for action altogether.

**(p. 207)** A third distinct reply zeroes in on why we are tempted to go psychological in the first place (Wiland 2003). Because Fred could be wrong about whether he is performing at the comedy club tonight, it seems we need to cite a reason for his action that works even if the world does not match Fred's belief, even if he believes falsely. Even if Fred never *in fact* believes falsely, it is the *possibility* of error that pushes us to look inside Fred's mind to identify what is motivating him. But a moment's reflection should reveal why this fails to establish psychologism. Fred can be wrong not only about whether he is performing at the comedy club tonight, but also about nearly *any* aspect of his mind that might seem to serve as a reason for action. If the possibility of error disqualifies non-psychological facts from being genuine reasons, it should disqualify psychological facts too. But where would that leave things? This shows that the possibility of error does not in fact favor psychologism. Perhaps reasons disjunctivism, then, is indeed a solution, so that the form of a reasons explanation can vary with the truth of the agent's beliefs.

So far we have considered the idea that reasons for action are psychological attitudes, that reasons for actions are facts, and a disjunctivist hybrid of the two. It's time to get some more options on the table.

## **8.5 The Appositional Account**

Jonathan Dancy has developed a very distinctive view of the nature of reasons for action, one he calls "the appositional account" (2003: 128). According to this account of reasons, the reason in question is *what* the agent believes, but not his believing it. To illustrate, reconsider Fred. Dancy holds that Fred is looking for his bow tie because he is performing at the comedy club tonight, as he (Fred) believes. The phrase "as he believes" here functions paratactically; it isn't part of the reason, but is merely attached to it. It indicates that the reason for which Fred is acting is also something that Fred believes, but Fred's believing it isn't what makes it a reason. Still, it is part of the explanation for why Fred is searching for his bow tie, even though it isn't the *reason* part of it.

One odd feature (or bug) of the appositional account is that the reason for which someone acts need not be true. That is, on Dancy's view, the reason Fred is looking for his bow tie is that he is performing at the comedy club tonight, even if it is not true that Fred is performing there tonight—even if Fred is getting that matter wrong. In this respect, the appositional account differs markedly from its rivals (Dancy 2003: 131–7).

According to psychologistic views, Fred's reason is at least in part *his belief that* he is performing at the comedy club tonight. And even if his belief is false, even if he is not performing at the comedy club tonight, it is still true that Fred believes that he is. Since psychologism maintains that his reason is in part his belief, then the reason is something that is the case. Likewise with reasons disjunctivism. In the ordinary case, where Fred isn't mistaken about the club schedule, his reason for action is something about the world, something which indeed obtains. In the case where Fred is mistaken about the club schedule, his reason is, as psychologism says, his psychological attitude, **(p. 208)** again something which is the case. In no instance is Fred's reason something that is not the case. Psychologism and reasons disjunctivism are alike in that they take reasons explanations to be *factive*. They both hold that the explanantia must be true.

The appositional account, by contrast, holds that the explanantia of reasons explanations are non-factive: they need not be true in order to explain the actions for which they are reasons. Fred's reason for searching for his bow tie is that he is scheduled to perform at the comedy club tonight, *even when he isn't*. But how can something that is not the case explain and thus be a reason for something that is the case?

Dancy appreciates how odd this sounds. He attempts to mitigate the oddness by pointing to other examples of nonfactive explanations (2003: 136). Suppose Clara is imprisoned for robbing a bank. Clara maintains she was innocent. Still, if someone asks her why she is imprisoned, she could truthfully reply, "For robbing a bank." To reply this way may pragmatically imply that that she indeed robbed a bank. But this reply does not assert that she robbed a bank, for she also can sensibly say, "I am imprisoned for robbing a bank, but I didn't rob a bank." The fact that she can sensibly add the clause "but I didn't rob a bank," thereby cancelling any presupposition to the contrary, reveals that the original explanation ("for robbing a bank") is consistent with the fact that she did not rob a bank. The original explanation is thus non-factive. And if *this* kind of non-factive explanation is palatable, then, Dancy concludes, non-factive reasons explanations should be too.

I admit non-factive explanations are sometimes benign. In the imprisonment example, it does seem acceptable for Clara to explain her imprisonment by saying "for robbing a bank." But it would sound much stranger for Clara to shift from using this adverbial phrase to using a clause. That is, suppose now Clara were to utter "I am imprisoned because I robbed a bank, but I didn't rob a bank." That sounds, at a minimum, infelicitous. And so since reasons explanation are canonically expressed by use of a "because" and a clause, I suspect that reasons explanations must be factive after all.

It's a thorny issue. Much of it has to do with the relation between motivating reasons (our topic) and normative reasons. What justifies imprisoning Clara, if anything, is that she robbed a bank. If she robbed a bank, we might say that there is a normative reason to imprison her, even if no one imprisons her for this reason. And if she didn't really rob a bank, then nothing justifies imprisoning her: there is no normative reason to lock her up. When we say "Clara was imprisoned for robbing a bank," we are engaging a perspective from which her robbing a bank justifies imprisoning her. That is the ground for imprison

ing her, and not the fact that she also is, say, the President's nemesis. Note that even if what really motivates her accusers and jurors is the fact that she is the President's nemesis, it can still be true that she is imprisoned for robbing a bank (even assuming that she did rob it). My point is that the phrase "for robbing a bank" seems to express what justifies (or purports to justify) her imprisonment, and not necessarily what best explains why she is imprisoned.

Recall I have been treating motivating reasons as a topic in its own right, possibly distinct from the topic of normative (or justificatory) reasons. Most do. Treating the two separately encourages the conclusion that while normative reasons are objective and **(p. 209)** nonpsychological, the reasons that motivate individuals are psychological. But Dancy (1995a, 2003) argues that this greatly exaggerates the difference between motivating reasons and normative reasons. He allows that sometimes people are motivated by things that fail to justify their actions. And he also allows that often people are not motivated by the reasons that would justify a course of action not taken. But these facts do not license the conclusion that motivating reasons and normative reasons occupy different metaphysical categories. Dancy argues instead that there are just plain old reasons, reason that can either motivate and/or justify the actions they are reasons for (see also Heuer 2004).

Compare reasons to birds. Not all birds fly. Not all birds chirp. But it would be a mistake to think that chirping birds and flying birds are two very different kinds of things, each occupying a different metaphysical category. It's just that while most birds chirp and most birds fly, not all do both. Dancy sees reasons much the same way. Although not all reasons motivate, nor do all reasons justify, the reasons that do motivate and the reasons that do justify are of the same kind.

Remember that we are now considering the relation between motivating reasons and normative reasons because we are evaluating Dancy's non-factive view of reasons. The nonfactive view of reasons seems most plausible when we think about other non- factive explanations, such as the one about Clara's imprisonment. This "explanation" seems to really give the purported justification for her imprisonment. So here are two features of the explanation involving Clara: (1) it is non-factive, and (2) the way it explains is by offering a justification of sorts. Now Dancy compares reasons explanations to explanations like the one involving Clara. He maintains the counterintuitive view that reasons explanations are non-factive. But he also holds that the motivating and the justifying functions of reasons are not sharply distinct. So reasons explanations, as Dancy sees them, resemble explanations like that involving Clara in both of these ways. The non-factivity of (motivating) reasons and the link between motivation and justification are thus mutually reinforcing. Given that Dancy goes for one, it's no surprise he goes for the other.

Dialectically, however, this works against him. Most philosophers doubt that reasons explanations are non-factive. Most also separately sharply the motivational and the normative. So it's no surprise that those who separately sharply the motivational and the normative also insist that reasons explanations are always factive, especially if these two posi

tions mutually support each other. This hardly shows that the appositional account is incorrect. Perhaps we've reached a stalemate.

## **8.6 Naïve Action Theory**

But there is another way to understand the nature of the reasons for which we act. Earlier I was rather vague and indeed sloppy when discussing the view that the reasons for which we act are in the world, rather than psychological attitudes. For there are different **(p. 210)** ways that reasons can be "in the world." One way is to characterize reasons as elements of the world that typically make no essential reference to the agent whose reasons they are. For example, Dana might give John a hand because John needs help. "John needs help" is (purportedly) a fact, a fact that doesn't essentially involve Dana, even though it is a way to characterize the reason for which she acts. Often, non-psychological reasons may be expressed this way.

But there is a very different way to treat reasons non-psychologically. Some argue that reasons for action are just *other* actions, other actions performed by the same agent. I often find when I introduce this idea to another philosopher, his or her face undergoes multiple interesting contortions before verbally responding, no matter whether that response turns out to be positive or negative. So let me explain.

Often one natural way to express your reason for doing something is to describe how doing it fits into or serves some larger or longer or more general action you are also doing. The chicken is crossing the road because it is (thereby) getting to the other side. I'm buying some balloons because I'm throwing a retirement party. She's tugging on her earlobe because she is signaling her partner. In each of these examples, the agent is doing the first thing for the reason that she is doing the second thing. Michael Thompson (2008, 2011), the person most responsible for formulating this view, calls it *naïve action theory*. I am fine with that name, although I want to emphasize that naïve action theory is not merely a theory about what actions are, but also a theory about what a reason for action is.

According to naïve action theory, the actions that are reasons relate in multiple different ways to the actions for which they are reasons. Sometimes, they are ends for which the action to be rationalized is a means. Buying balloons is a means to the end of throwing a retirement party. Sometimes, they are parts of the actions that rationalize them. Writing the letter "a" is a part of writing the word "action." Sometimes, they are more general ways of describing some conventional action. Tugging on your earlobe is a way of signaling your partner. In each case, the actions they rationalize are all means, parts, phases, and/or other descriptions of them. The two actions thus all bear some sort of relation to one another—a relation that makes the reason relation between them also obtain.

Each of these reasons is an action with imperfective aspect, represented in English with the progressive. The reasons listed above are buy*ing* an omelette, writ*ing* the word "action," and signal*ing* your partner. These are all actions in progress, rather than completed

actions. And the actions they rationalize are (typically) going on at the same time as they are.

One attractive feature of naïve action theory is that it echoes one prominent psychologistic view about reasons for belief. Some have thought that the only thing that could be a reason for belief is another belief (Davidson 1986). When we believe things for reasons, we do so for other beliefs. (I don't think this is quite correct, but let's set that aside.) If reasons for beliefs are other beliefs, then the thought that reason itself is unified **(p. 211)** would pressure us to think likewise that reasons for actions are other actions. Perhaps reason relates things of *like kinds* to each other (Wiland 2003).

Is naïve action theory itself psychologistic? It seems not, since on its view reasons for action are not psychological *attitudes*. But reasons are not *completely* non-psychological either. Rather, according to naïve action theory, reasons are just as psychological as intentional action is. But how psychological is that? On the one hand, intentional actions are typically events or processes that take place in the world. They aren't just in the mind. On the other hand, some event or process qualifies as an intentional action only if its agent knows she is so acting. Nicole isn't drifting onto the shoulder of the road intentionally unless she knows that she is. So there is always a psychological element or aspect of intentional action.

This much is already fairly well known and understood. But it is also important to see how an agent's psychology is engaged not only in the intentional action to be rationalized, nor only in the intentional action that does the rationalizing, but also in the nexus between the two. Consider: you are reading this paragraph—intentionally, and so you know that you are. You are also reading this chapter—intentionally, and so you know that too. But you also know, in exactly the same way, that you are reading this paragraph *because* you are reading this chapter. That is, you know the nexus between the two, the nexus that makes it the case that the one *is* your reason for the other. You don't need to figure that out by means of observation, psychoanalysis, or guesswork. Your psychology is thus engaged by the entire nexus of descriptions of intentional actions whose form bears the mark of practical reason. And so, while reasons themselves are worldly processes, like making a quiche or filling a cavity, they wouldn't be reasons were it not for the way intentional agency constitutes their relation to the actions for which they are reasons.

Reasons for action understood as intentional actions, then, are both psychological and world-involving. (It might be fruitful to treat intentional action the way Timothy Williamson treats knowledge, as something both psychological and factive, but which cannot be factored neatly into an inner and an outer part.) To my mind, there is something satisfyingly Hegelian about the way naïve action theory sublates psychologism and antipsychologism.

I'll conclude by conceding that the metaphysical picture lying behind naïve action theory can look rather odd. Circularity and regress problems threaten. First, the circularity problem. If the reason for your A-ing is that you are B-ing, and your reason for your B-ing is that you are C-ing, and the reason for your C-ing is that you are A-ing, then your reasons for action loop back upon themselves. That would be very strange.

The circularity problem is avoided if there are no such loops. But then there might be a regress problem. If the reason for your A-ing is that you are B-ing, and your reason for your B-ing is that you are C-ing, and the reason for your C-ing is that you are D-ing, and this series never stops, then it appears you are doing an infinite number of things. This seems very unlikely. At best, it too would be very odd.

**(p. 212)** Both the circularity and the regress problems are avoided if the chain of actions that are reasons *stops* at some point. If the reason for your A-ing is that you are B-ing, and your reason for your B-ing is that you are C-ing, and the reason for your C-ing (and for many or all of your *other* actions) is that you are Z-ing, and there is no further reason for why you are Z-ing, the above problems are all dodged. Perhaps Z-ing is just your life: one very big action! But this too seems strange. Defenders of naïve action theory still need to explain how it can make sense to think that your life is the reason for which you do pretty much everything else.4 *Eudaimonia* played just this role in ancient philosophy. Whether it can still plausibly play this role remains an open question for us.

## **References**

Alvarez, M. (2009). "How Many Kinds of Reasons?" *Philosophical Explorations* 12(2): 181– 93.

Anscombe, G. E. M. (2000). *Intention*, 2nd edn. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Collins, A. W. (1997). "The Psychological Reality of Reasons." *Ratio* 10(2): 108–23.

Dancy, J. (1995a). "Why There Is Really No Such Thing as the Theory of Motivation." *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society* 95: 1–18.

Dancy, J. (1995b). "Arguments from Illusion." *Philosophical Quarterly* 45: 421–38.

Dancy, J. (2003). *Practical Reality*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Davidson, D. (1963). "Actions, Reasons, and Causes." *Journal of Philosophy* 60: 685–99.

Davidson, D. (1986). "A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge." In E. LePore (ed.), *Truth and Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson*, 307–19. Oxford: Blackwell.

Haddock A., and F. Macpherson (eds) (2008). *Disjunctivism: Perception, Action, and Knowledge*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Heuer, U. (2004). "Reasons for Actions and Desires." *Philosophical Studies* 121(1): 43–63.

McDowell, J. (1979). "Virtue and Reason." *The Monist* 62(3): 331–50.

Nagel, T. (1971). *The Possibility of Altruism*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Norman, R. (2001). "Practical Reasons and the Redundancy of Motives." *Ethical Theory and Moral Practice* 4(1): 3–22.

Schroeder, M. (2008). *Slaves of the Passions*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Setiya, K. (2007). *Reasons Without Rationalism*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Smith, M. (1987). "The Humean Theory of Motivation." *Mind* 96(381): 36–61.

Smith, M. (1994). *The Moral Problem*. Oxford: Blackwell.

Stout, R. (1996). *Things That Happen Because They Should*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Stout, R. (2010). "Deviant Causal Chains." In T. O'Connor and C. Sandis (eds), *A Companion to the Philosophy of Action*, 159–65. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.

Thompson, M. (2008). *Life and Action: Elementary Structures of Practice and Practical Thought*. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Thompson, M. (2011). "Anscombe's *Intention* and Practical Knowledge." In A. Ford, J. Hornsby, and F. Stoutland (eds), *Essays on Anscombe's* Intention, 198–210. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

**(p. 213)** Wiland, E. (2003). "Psychologism, Practical Reason and the Possibility of Error." *Philosophical Quarterly* 53(210): 68–78.

Wiland, E. (2012). *Reasons*. London: Continuum.

Wiland, E. (2013). "In the Beginning Was the Doing: The Premises of the Practical Syllogism." *Canadian Journal of Philosophy* 43(3): 303–21.

Williams, B. (1981). "Internal and External Reasons." In *Moral Luck: Philosophical Papers 1973–1980*, 101–13. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

## **Notes:**

[^1]: A weaker psychologistic position makes no claims about what reasons *are*. Instead of making any metaphysical claims, it asserts only the biconditional: you have a (motivating) reason to V if and only if you have certain psychological attitudes involving V-ing. See Schroeder (2008).

[^2]: Note that constructing a parallel argument for reasons for belief seems not to be available. The above argument I also rehearse in some more detail in Wiland (2012).

[^3]: For more on this view, see Anscombe (2000: sect. 47 in light of sect. 42). [^4]: Wiland (2013) begins this task.

--- 
